
BOIL WATER ADVISORY ENDS FOR BASIN CITY RESIDENTS
US State News
August 31, 2011 Wednesday 11:03 AM  EST

Copyright 2011 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 154 words
Body




OLYMPIA, Wash., Aug. 31 -- The Washington State Department of Health issued the following news release:
Customers of the Basin City Water-Sewer District no longer need to boil their tap water. The advisory was issued last Friday after potentially harmful bacteria were detected in the water.
The system has been disinfected, and lab results on water samples confirm that the water meets federal drinking water standards. A Department of Health engineer, who inspected the system on Sunday, believes the contamination was likely caused by recent repair work on one of the system's wells.
Basin City is about five miles west of Mesa in Franklin County. The water system serves about 850 people during the summer.
Customers who have questions about their water can call the utility at 509-531-6308. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com
Load-Date: September 1, 2011



End of Document


Vermont Officials Assess the Risks In Towns Lacking Water and Power
The New York Times
September 1, 2011 Thursday
Late Edition - Final

Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 20
Length: 639 words
Byline: By DIRK VAN SUSTEREN; Abby Goodnough contributed reporting from Williamsville, Vt., and Timothy Williams from New York.
Body




CALAIS, Vt. -- Federal and state environmental teams on Wednesday investigated the extent of health risks related to damaged sewage and water treatment plants in more than a dozen Vermont towns where flash flooding has left thousands of people without electricity or potable water since Sunday.
Engineers from the federal Environmental Protection Agency and the state's Department of Environmental Conservation visited several areas that had been cut off to assess the hazards, officials said. The teams were trying to determine the extent of damage to sewage and water plants in at least 13 towns, including chemical and other hazardous material spills and leaks, said Justin Johnson, deputy commissioner of the environmental department.
Three days after remnants of the tropical storm that began as Hurricane Irene spawned torrential downpours in areas rarely bothered by flooding, access in and around much of southern Vermont remained so difficult that officials were unsure how many facilities had been contaminated because they had been unable to send out inspectors until Wednesday.
''We have 13 towns on 'boil water' notice, where we know there has been some level of damage, but we don't have an exact count right now,'' Mr. Johnson said, adding that he expected the number to grow.
He said he was unaware of any illnesses from contaminated facilities.
The Vermont National Guard continued to airlift supplies to residents in 13 towns stranded by washed out roadways, damaged bridges, fallen trees and mud. A helicopter from the Illinois National Guard joined the relief effort on Wednesday, helping distribute supplies, said Mark Bosma, a spokesman for Vermont Emergency Management.
By Wednesday night, crews had completed makeshift roads into all of the isolated towns, state officials said. They reached the last, Wardsboro, population 850, in south central Vermont, just before 6 p.m.
The roads, some of which pass through treacherous mountain terrain, are accessible only by all-terrain vehicles and four-wheel-drive trucks and cannot support a large-scale evacuation of residents, officials said.
National Guard troops have been going door to door to check on residents in the sequestered towns. Gov. Peter Shumlin visited three of them by helicopter on Wednesday, asking residents what they needed and telling them to ''hang in there.''
In Rochester, one of the isolated towns, dozens of residents were eating supper in the yard of a local inn before night fell. Many had contributed food from their freezers for what has become a twilight ritual.
''The lack of power, the lack of access, have definitely made people anxious,'' said Sandy Haas, a member of the Vermont House of Representatives who lives there.
Officials say they do not know how long it will take to repair some 260 roadways and 35 bridges across the state.
In Mendon, part of Route 4, the main east-west route through central Vermont, was swept away, as were at least four historic covered bridges, officials said. Railroad tracks were also badly damaged, and Amtrak suspended service indefinitely on its Vermont routes.
When asked how soon some of the more significant repairs to the state's infrastructure might take place, Gov. Peter Shumlin noted that the start of winter was not far off. ''We are up against a time frame,'' he said. ''Snow will begin flying in 12 weeks.''
About 10,000 people remained without power in the state. Utility crews were using pickup trucks, all terrain vehicles and even dirt bikes to get to cut-off towns.
Federal officials said medical professionals had been sent to Vermont to help with emergency care.
Online Correction: August 31, 2011, Wednesday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article incorrectly referred to Route 4 in Mendon, Vt., as Interstate 4.
http://www.nytimes.com
Load-Date: September 1, 2011



End of Document


69 PUBLIC WATER SYSTEMS UNDER BOIL WATER ADVISORY; HOMEOWNERS WITH PRIVATE WELLS IN FLOODED AREAS ARE CAUTIONED
States News Service
September 1, 2011 Thursday

Copyright 2011 States News Service
Length: 750 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: HARTFORD, CT 
Body




The following information was released by the Connecticut Department of Public Health (DPH):
State health officials today announced that 69 small public drinking water systems in the state are under a boil water advisory. The Department of Public Health (DPH) is monitoring these systems and working to contact other small public drinking water systems to determine their status and offer assistance as needed. For a list of systems under a boil water advisory, please refer to the end of this press release. A current list of systems under a boil water advisory is available at www.ct.gov/dph/ (click on "Hurricane Irene: Important Health Information.")
While some large public water supply systems in the state lost their normal power source, their water supply was not interrupted due to emergency power capabilities. DPH continues to monitor and provide assistance to these systems to ensure drinking water safety.
"Safe drinking water is a top priority," said Lori Mathieu, Chief of the DPH Drinking Water Section. "The vast majority of Connecticut residents are served by large drinking water systems, and we are fortunate that these large systems have not been disrupted by the storm. However, it's important that residential customers served by systems that have issued a boil water advisory follow the guidance of their public water system."
Residential customers served by water systems under a boil water advisory should:
Safely boil their water by bringing it to a rolling boil for one minute. A rolling boil means that there are very large bubbles in the water, making the water move very quickly. Make sure the water does not have any floating pieces in it before you boil it. To make the boiled water taste better, pour the water back and forth between two clean containers a few times. Boiled water should be allowed to cool to a safe temperature before drinking or handling.
Use boiled or bottled water when cooking, washing fruits and vegetables, brushing teeth, or making baby formula. Boiled water should be allowed to cool to a safe temperature before drinking and handling.
Use water that has previously boiled and cooled to a safe temperature or bottled water to wash hands when cooking.
Adults and older children do not need to use boiled water to shower or bathe, but should try not to swallow any water or get any water into their mouths. Infants, toddlers, the elderly, and people with severely compromised immune systems should be bathed using water that has been previously boiled and cooled to a safe temperature or bottled water.
State health officials said that large systems serve a population of 2.6 million people. There are approximately 500 smaller community public water systems that each serve less than 1,000 people.
Private Wells
Homeowners with private wells in flooded areas should consider their wells contaminated and disinfect their wells before resuming their use. Drilled wells located in well pits where groundwater tables have risen in the pit above the top of the well head and shallow wells are most at risk of contamination. Other indicators of contamination may include water discoloration or unusual taste or odor to your private water supply.
If you feel that your water supply may be contaminated, disinfection of the source followed by water sampling (both bacteriological and certain chemical parameters) is encouraged. If you notice any unusual changes to the water (color, taste or odor), precautionary measures should be taken such as using bottled water for drinking and cooking until water testing is done to find if contamination is present in the water supply.
You should also contact your local health department or the DPH Private Well Program at (860) 509-7296 for additional advice if necessary. Testing at the DPH laboratory is available through your local health department. To contact your local health department, go to www.ct.gov/dph/localhealth.
For more information on how to boil water or disinfect your private well, go to www.ct.gov/dph and click on "Hurricane Irene: Important Health Information."
The Department of Public Health Drinking Water Section is responsible for the administration of state and federal drinking water regulations and is dedicated to assuring the quality and adequacy of the state's public drinking water sources. DPH provides technical assistance, education and regulatory enforcement to over 2,600 public drinking water systems, which provide drinking water to approximately 2.9 million persons on a daily basis.
Load-Date: September 6, 2011



End of Document


91 PUBLIC WATER SYSTEMS UNDER BOIL WATER ADVISORY; HOMEOWNERS WITH PRIVATE WELLS IN FLOODED AREAS ARE CAUTIONED
States News Service
September 1, 2011 Thursday

Copyright 2011 States News Service
Length: 750 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: HARTFORD, CT 
Body




The following information was released by the Connecticut Department of Public Health (DPH):
State health officials today announced that 91 small public drinking water systems in the state are under a boil water advisory. The Department of Public Health (DPH) is monitoring these systems and working to contact other small public drinking water systems to determine their status and offer assistance as needed. For a list of systems under a boil water advisory, please refer to the end of this press release. A current list of systems under a boil water advisory is available at www.ct.gov/dph/ (click on "Hurricane Irene: Important Health Information.")
While some large public water supply systems in the state lost their normal power source, their water supply was not interrupted due to emergency power capabilities. DPH continues to monitor and provide assistance to these systems to ensure drinking water safety.
"Safe drinking water is a top priority," said Lori Mathieu, Chief of the DPH Drinking Water Section. "The vast majority of Connecticut residents are served by large drinking water systems, and we are fortunate that these large systems have not been disrupted by the storm. However, it's important that residential customers served by systems that have issued a boil water advisory follow the guidance of their public water system."
Residential customers served by water systems under a boil water advisory should:
Safely boil their water by bringing it to a rolling boil for one minute. A rolling boil means that there are very large bubbles in the water, making the water move very quickly. Make sure the water does not have any floating pieces in it before you boil it. To make the boiled water taste better, pour the water back and forth between two clean containers a few times. Boiled water should be allowed to cool to a safe temperature before drinking or handling.
Use boiled or bottled water when cooking, washing fruits and vegetables, brushing teeth, or making baby formula. Boiled water should be allowed to cool to a safe temperature before drinking and handling.
Use water that has previously boiled and cooled to a safe temperature or bottled water to wash hands when cooking.
Adults and older children do not need to use boiled water to shower or bathe, but should try not to swallow any water or get any water into their mouths. Infants, toddlers, the elderly, and people with severely compromised immune systems should be bathed using water that has been previously boiled and cooled to a safe temperature or bottled water.
State health officials said that large systems serve a population of 2.6 million people. There are approximately 500 smaller community public water systems that each serve less than 1,000 people.
Private Wells
Homeowners with private wells in flooded areas should consider their wells contaminated and disinfect their wells before resuming their use. Drilled wells located in well pits where groundwater tables have risen in the pit above the top of the well head and shallow wells are most at risk of contamination. Other indicators of contamination may include water discoloration or unusual taste or odor to your private water supply.
If you feel that your water supply may be contaminated, disinfection of the source followed by water sampling (both bacteriological and certain chemical parameters) is encouraged. If you notice any unusual changes to the water (color, taste or odor), precautionary measures should be taken such as using bottled water for drinking and cooking until water testing is done to find if contamination is present in the water supply.
You should also contact your local health department or the DPH Private Well Program at (860) 509-7296 for additional advice if necessary. Testing at the DPH laboratory is available through your local health department. To contact your local health department, go to www.ct.gov/dph/localhealth.
For more information on how to boil water or disinfect your private well, go to www.ct.gov/dph and click on "Hurricane Irene: Important Health Information."
The Department of Public Health Drinking Water Section is responsible for the administration of state and federal drinking water regulations and is dedicated to assuring the quality and adequacy of the state's public drinking water sources. DPH provides technical assistance, education and regulatory enforcement to over 2,600 public drinking water systems, which provide drinking water to approximately 2.9 million persons on a daily basis.
Load-Date: September 6, 2011



End of Document


Boil Water Advisory Lifted in Irvington, Springfield and Summit; Some customers in Essex County still under Boil Water Advisory
Business Wire
September 1, 2011 Thursday 5:44 PM GMT

Copyright 2011 Business Wire, Inc.
Distribution: Business Editors; Energy Editors; Community Editors
Length: 687 words
Dateline: VOORHEES, N.J. 
Body




New Jersey American Water has lifted the boil water advisory for its customers in the Township of Irvington, Springfield Township and the City of Summit. Customers in those municipalities no longer have to boil water before consumption as water quality results for bacteriological samples show that the water meets all state and federal water quality standards.
NOTE: if customers return to normal water consumption patterns, it will put undue stress on the system and potentially impact our emergency efforts to restore stability. New Jersey American Water customers in the impacted areas are required to limit water consumption to essential needs only and discontinue outdoor water use.
The boil advisory had been in effect since last Sunday when the company's Canoe Brook Water Treatment Plant in Millburn was flooded and lost power as a result of Hurricane Irene.
A boil water advisory remains in effect for New Jersey American Water customers in the following communities: Maplewood, Millburn Township, Short Hills, and West Orange remain under a boil water advisory as a precautionary measure while New Jersey American Water works to restore stable water service to those municipalities. New Jersey American Water continues to maintain bottled water distribution sites in Maplewood, Millburn, and West Orange.
Lifting the boil water advisory in these areas is contingent on these three factors: Recovery, Stability and Quality:
Recovery
New Jersey American Water has activated all of its interconnections with other water systems, and has established more than a dozen temporary interconnections and pumping stations in recent days to bring as much water supply online as possible. The company has also initiated a number of emergency/temporary modifications to the system, including hydrant-to-hydrant connections, to restore stability to the water system.
The system is recovering gradually as a number of facilities are still without power. The company has established emergency generators at those facilities and continues around the clock efforts to restore the Canoe Brook Water Treatment to full power and return all customers to normal water service. However, in some areas, the system is not yet stable. Pressures and flows may still fluctuate for customers in some locations.
Stability
At this time, if customers return to normal water consumption patterns, it will put undue stress on the water system and potentially impact emergency efforts to restore stability. New Jersey American Water requires customers in the impacted areas to limit water consumption to essential needs only.
Quality
New Jersey American Water continues to collect water quality samples at least twice daily throughout the system. Even if those tests come back clean, the company must ensure that system pressures and flows are stable before we can lift the order for the remaining communities.
New Jersey American Water appreciates its customers' patience and cooperation while the company works to restore normal water service to all of its customers.
Customers can continue to visit New Jersey American Water web site for Hurricane Irene Updates at www.newjerseyamwater.com .
New Jersey American Water, a wholly owned subsidiary of American Water (NYSE:AWK), is the largest publicly traded water utility in the state, providing high-quality and reliable water and/or wastewater services to approximately 2.5 million people. Founded in 1886, American Water is the largest publicly traded U.S. water and wastewater utility company. With headquarters in Voorhees, N.J., the company employs more than 7,000 dedicated professionals who provide drinking water, wastewater and other related services to approximately 15 million people in more than 30 states, as well as parts of Canada. More information can be found by visiting www.amwater.com .
In 2011, American Water is celebrating its 125th anniversary with a yearlong campaign to promote water efficiency and the importance of protecting water from source to tap. To learn more, visit www.amwater125.com .

CONTACT: New Jersey American Water
Richard G. Barnes, 856-723-0408
richard.barnes@amwater.com
http://www.businesswire.com
Load-Date: September 2, 2011



End of Document


Updated**91 Public Water Systems under Boil Water Advisory; Homeowners with Private Wells in Flooded Areas are Cautioned
Targeted News Service
September 1, 2011 Thursday 1:51 AM  EST

Copyright 2011 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 765 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: HARTFORD, Conn. 
Body




The Connecticut Department of Public Health issued the following news release:
State health officials today announced that 91 small public drinking water systems in the state are under a boil water advisory. The Department of Public Health (DPH) is monitoring these systems and working to contact other small public drinking water systems to determine their status and offer assistance as needed. For a list of systems under a boil water advisory, please refer to the end of this press release. A current list of systems under a boil water advisory is available at www.ct.gov/dph/ (click on "Hurricane Irene: Important Health Information.")
While some large public water supply systems in the state lost their normal power source, their water supply was not interrupted due to emergency power capabilities. DPH continues to monitor and provide assistance to these systems to ensure drinking water safety.
"Safe drinking water is a top priority," said Lori Mathieu, Chief of the DPH Drinking Water Section. "The vast majority of Connecticut residents are served by large drinking water systems, and we are fortunate that these large systems have not been disrupted by the storm. However, it's important that residential customers served by systems that have issued a boil water advisory follow the guidance of their public water system."
Residential customers served by water systems under a boil water advisory should:
* Safely boil their water by bringing it to a rolling boil for one minute. A rolling boil means that there are very large bubbles in the water, making the water move very quickly. Make sure the water does not have any floating pieces in it before you boil it. To make the boiled water taste better, pour the water back and forth between two clean containers a few times. Boiled water should be allowed to cool to a safe temperature before drinking or handling.
* Use boiled or bottled water when cooking, washing fruits and vegetables, brushing teeth, or making baby formula. Boiled water should be allowed to cool to a safe temperature before drinking and handling.
* Use water that has previously boiled and cooled to a safe temperature or bottled water to wash hands when cooking.
* Adults and older children do not need to use boiled water to shower or bathe, but should try not to swallow any water or get any water into their mouths. Infants, toddlers, the elderly, and people with severely compromised immune systems should be bathed using water that has been previously boiled and cooled to a safe temperature or bottled water.
State health officials said that large systems serve a population of 2.6 million people. There are approximately 500 smaller community public water systems that each serve less than 1,000 people.
Private Wells
Homeowners with private wells in flooded areas should consider their wells contaminated and disinfect their wells before resuming their use. Drilled wells located in well pits where groundwater tables have risen in the pit above the top of the well head and shallow wells are most at risk of contamination. Other indicators of contamination may include water discoloration or unusual taste or odor to your private water supply.
If you feel that your water supply may be contaminated, disinfection of the source followed by water sampling (both bacteriological & certain chemical parameters) is encouraged. If you notice any unusual changes to the water (color, taste or odor), precautionary measures should be taken such as using bottled water for drinking and cooking until water testing is done to find if contamination is present in the water supply.
You should also contact your local health department or the DPH Private Well Program at (860) 509-7296 for additional advice if necessary. Testing at the DPH laboratory is available through your local health department. To contact your local health department, go to www.ct.gov/dph/localhealth.
For more information on how to boil water or disinfect your private well, go to www.ct.gov/dph and click on "Hurricane Irene: Important Health Information."
The Department of Public Health Drinking Water Section is responsible for the administration of state and federal drinking water regulations and is dedicated to assuring the quality and adequacy of the state's public drinking water sources. DPH provides technical assistance, education and regulatory enforcement to over 2,600 public drinking water systems, which provide drinking water to approximately 2.9 million persons on a daily basis.
Contact: William Gerrish, 860/509-7270
Copyright Targeted News Services
TNS mv45 110903-3564937
Load-Date: September 3, 2011



End of Document


Pennsylvania American Water: 'Like Us' and Support a Good Cause; Each new Facebook, Twitter follower brings donation for low-income assistance
Business Wire
September 1, 2011 Thursday 1:15 PM GMT

Copyright 2011 Business Wire, Inc.
Distribution: Philanthropy Writers; Business Editors
Length: 541 words
Dateline: HERSHEY, Pa. 
Body




Pennsylvania American Water announced today that it will donate one dollar to the Help to Others (H2O) Program (TM) for every new fan or follower on            Facebook and            Twitter . The special campaign to generate financial support for the company's low-income assistance program runs from September 1, to October 15, 2011.
"This campaign is a great opportunity for stakeholders to start engaging with Pennsylvania American Water through social media, and at the same time, lend their support to low-income families who need help with their water bills," said Terry Maenza, Pennsylvania American Water director of communications and external affairs. "Twitter and Facebook enable us to connect directly with customers; that's why we're urging more people to join us."
To join, visit the company's social media sites at www.twitter.com/paamwater and            www.facebook.com/pennsylvaniaamwater . You can also view a brief video about this special campaign on            YouTube , or by clicking            http://youtu.be/EnXQoBOvxQk . Donations will be limited to the first 2,000 people who sign up.
Pennsylvania American Water's Facebook and Twitter pages provide real-time information, as well as:
•	Water emergency and boil water advisories.
•	Updates on water and wastewater construction projects.
•	Information on customer programs, community events and environmental initiatives.
•	Conservation and watershed protection tips.
For almost 20 years, Pennsylvania American Water has been assisting low-income customers who qualify through its H2O Program. The program offers qualified recipients grants of up to $500 per year, a 65-percent discount on the monthly service fee, and water-saving devices and education.
In 2010, Pennsylvania American Water provided $327,000 in assistance grants to help customers pay their water bill. Grants are funded through a corporate match, customer contributions, employee donations and other fundraising activities. In 2010, Pennsylvania American Water increased its corporate match to $250,000 per year.
For more information, or to see if you qualify, please contact Pennsylvania American Water's program administrator, Dollar Energy Fund, toll free at 1-888-282-6816.
Pennsylvania American Water, a wholly owned subsidiary of American Water (NYSE: AWK), is the largest water utility in the state, providing high-quality and reliable water and/or wastewater services to approximately 2.2 million people. Founded in 1886, American Water is the largest publicly traded U.S. water and wastewater utility company. With headquarters in Voorhees, N.J., the company employs more than 7,000 dedicated professionals who provide drinking water, wastewater and other related services to approximately 15 million people in more than 30 states, as well as parts of Canada. More information can be found by visiting www.amwater.com .
In 2011, American Water is celebrating its 125th anniversary with a yearlong campaign to promote water efficiency and the importance of protecting water from source to tap. To learn more, visit www.amwater125.com .

CONTACT: Pennsylvania American Water
Eastern/Central Pennsylvania:
Terry M. Maenza
T: 610-670-7789 ext. 1009
M: 610-849-6484
terry.maenza@amwater.com
or
Western Pennsylvania:
Gary Lobaugh
T: 724-873-3674
M: 724-944-5148
gary.lobaugh@amwater.com
http://www.businesswire.com
Load-Date: September 2, 2011



End of Document


NC damage estimates from Irene more than $190M
The Associated Press State & Local Wire
September 1, 2011 Thursday 7:40 PM GMT

Copyright 2011 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 657 words
Byline: By GARY D. ROBERTSON, Associated Press
Dateline: PINETOPS N.C.
Body




Damage estimates for North Carolina inched up Thursday as teams assessing the impact of Hurricane Irene tallied the costs and two new counties were added to the list state officials thought should qualify for federal help.
Edgecombe County farmers suffered at least $44 million in crop damage from last weekend's storm, the local cooperative extension office said Thursday, pushing the statewide tally to $192 million. The farm-service agency said 70 percent of the county's 8,500 acres of tobacco was damaged. Local farmers said the estimate is low.
The statewide damage estimate was expected to grow as counties report their figures, state emergency management spokesman Ernie Seneca said.
Local governments reported that their costs for removing debris and making infrastructure repairs will be about $40 million, Gov. Beverly Perdue's office said. Martin County estimated some $37 million in damage to crops, especially tobacco and cotton, officials said Wednesday. Perdue had said earlier that a preliminary estimate of damage hit more than $71 million.
Perdue's office said it has asked the federal government to add Halifax and Lenoir counties to the state's request for individual assistance. President Barack Obama on Wednesday approved Perdue's initial request for individual assistance for Beaufort, Carteret, Craven, Dare, Hyde, Pamlico and Tyrrell counties.
Perdue sought to emphasize the storm's toll on farmers with a visit Thursday with an Edgecombe County tobacco farmer. Perdue used the visit to sign an executive order that will make it easier for state crews to remove storm debris from farmland and for farmers to burn storm-related trash.
At Pitt Farms outside Pinetops, about 100 acres of tobacco appeared lost after Irene's high winds shredded leaves and turned them yellow and brown. Farmer Burt Pitt said he was able to harvest about 20 acres of his tobacco, working even in the rain to salvage a portion of his crop.
"What can you get from this field?" Perdue asked Pitt, looking out over remaining rows of tobacco plants.
"Heartache," Pitt responded.
Other farmers visiting with Perdue asked her to intervene with the federal and state governments for help, saying insurance won't cover losses and federal programs don't offer much immediate help beyond more borrowing.
"We're going to need some kind of help," said Richard Anderson, a tobacco grower in Tarboro. "Those of us in the tobacco industry are the first to be taxed and we'd just like some of our tax dollars to come back and help us."
The governor told local agriculture officials to assemble a letter she can forward to U.S. Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack to highlight urgent needs and ways to end a logjam in applications for disaster relief.
"We've got to really just stand up and fight," Perdue said.
While many Outer Banks beaches were open Thursday, one was closed because of floating debris.
Corolla's beach was closed Wednesday after lifeguards saw trash, wood planks and tree branches floating in the water and worried they could hit a swimmer. Officials were waiting for the high tide to recede Thursday to determine whether the water at Corolla was safe, Currituck County Emergency Management spokesman Randall Edwards said.
"I guess it's just one of those things that happen in a big storm like that. Things that wash out to sea wash back up on the shore," Edwards said. "It just adds to the things we need to take care of."
About 15 miles south, the beach at Duck was open and workers were collecting debris that was washing up, Dare County spokeswoman Dorothy Toolan said, but all beaches were open on Bodie Island.
Farther south, county leaders visited Hatteras Island to weigh when residents who evacuated from communities like Rodanthe and Hatteras might be able to return home, Toolan said.
Boil-water advisories were removed for the length of the county's barrier islands, Toolan said.
Associated Press Writer Emery P. Dalesio contributed to this report.
Load-Date: September 2, 2011



End of Document


NC damage estimates from Irene near $150M
The Associated Press State & Local Wire
September 1, 2011 Thursday 6:32 PM GMT

Copyright 2011 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 605 words
Byline: By GARY D. ROBERTSON, Associated Press
Dateline: PINETOPS N.C.
Body




Damage estimates for North Carolina inched up Thursday as teams assessing the impact of Hurricane Irene tallied the costs and two new counties were added to the list state officials thought should qualify for federal help.
The statewide $148 million damage estimate was expected to grow as counties report their figures, state emergency management spokesman Ernie Seneca said.
Local governments reported that their costs for removing debris and making infrastructure repairs will be about $40 million, Gov. Beverly Perdue's office said. Martin County estimated some $37 million in damage to crops, especially tobacco and cotton, officials said Wednesday. Perdue had said earlier that a preliminary estimate of damage hit more than $71 million.
Perdue's office said it has asked the federal government to add Halifax and Lenoir counties to the state's request for individual assistance. President Barack Obama on Wednesday approved Perdue's initial request for individual assistance for Beaufort, Carteret, Craven, Dare, Hyde, Pamlico and Tyrrell counties.
Perdue sought to emphasize the storm's toll on farmers with a visit Thursday with an Edgecombe County tobacco farmer. Perdue used the visit to sign an executive order that will make it easier for state crews to remove storm debris from farmland and for farmers to burn storm-related trash.
At Pitt Farms outside Pinetops, about 100 acres of tobacco appeared lost after Irene's high winds shredded leaves and turned them yellow and brown. Farmer Burt Pitt said he was able to harvest about 20 acres of his tobacco, working even in the rain to salvage a portion of his crop.
"What can you get from this field?" Perdue asked Pitt, looking out over remaining rows of tobacco plants.
"Heartache," Pitt responded.
Other farmers visiting with Perdue asked her to intervene with the federal and state governments for help, saying insurance won't cover losses and federal programs don't have offer much immediate help beyond more borrowing.
"We're going to need some kind of help," said Richard Anderson, a tobacco grower in Tarboro. "Those of us in the tobacco industry are the first to be taxed and we'd just like some of our tax dollars to come back and help us."
The governor told local agriculture officials to assemble a letter she can forward to U.S. Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack to highlight urgent needs and ways to end a logjam in applications for disaster relief.
"We've got to really just stand up and fight," Perdue said.
While many Outer Banks beaches were open Thursday, one was closed because of floating debris.
Corolla's beach was closed Wednesday after lifeguards saw trash, wood planks and tree branches floating in the water and worried they could hit a swimmer. Officials were waiting for the high tide to recede Thursday to determine whether the water at Corolla was safe, Currituck County Emergency Management spokesman Randall Edwards said.
"I guess it's just one of those things that happen in a big storm like that. Things that wash out to sea wash back up on the shore," Edwards said. "It just adds to the things we need to take care of."
About 15 miles south, the beach at Duck was open and workers where collecting debris that was washing up, Dare County spokeswoman Dorothy Toolan said, but beaches were open on Bodie Island.
Farther south, county leaders visited Hatteras Island to weigh when residents who evacuated from communities like Rodanthe and Hatteras might be able to return home, Toolan said.
Boil-water advisories were removed for the length of the county's barrier islands, Toolan said.
Associated Press Writer Emery P. Dalesio contributed to this report.
Load-Date: September 2, 2011



End of Document


Natchitoches Campus to be Open Friday
Targeted News Service
September 1, 2011 Thursday 12:34 AM  EST

Copyright 2011 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 118 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: NATCHITOCHES, La. 
Body




Northwestern State University issued the following news release:
Northwestern State University's Natchitoches campus will be open as scheduled Friday, according to Dr. Lisa Abney, provost and vice president for academic and student affairs. Natchitoches Parish schools and parochial schools in Natchitoches will be closed Friday due to the boil water advisory in effect.
All campuses of Northwestern will be closed Monday for the Labor Day holiday. Administrative offices will reopen and classes will resume Tuesday, Sept. 6.
Contact: David West, News Bureau, Northwestern State University, Natchitoches, LA 71497, 318/357-6466, west@nsula.edu
Copyright Targeted News Services
TNS cp-110902-JF78-3562547 StaffFurigay
Load-Date: September 2, 2011



End of Document


NATCHITOCHES CAMPUS TO BE OPEN SEPT. 2
US Fed News
September 1, 2011 Thursday 4:10 PM  EST

Copyright 2011 HT Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Length: 114 words
Body




NATCHITOCHES, La., Sept. 1 -- Northwestern State University issued the following news release:
Northwestern State University's Natchitoches campus will be open as scheduled Friday, according to Dr. Lisa Abney, provost and vice president for academic and student affairs. Natchitoches Parish schools and parochial schools in Natchitoches will be closed Friday due to the boil water advisory in effect.
All campuses of Northwestern will be closed Monday for the Labor Day holiday. Administrative offices will reopen and classes will resume Tuesday, Sept. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com
Load-Date: September 2, 2011



End of Document


Conn. advises residents to check water
The Associated Press State & Local Wire
September 1, 2011 Thursday 7:14 PM GMT

Copyright 2011 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 143 words
Dateline: HARTFORD Conn.
Body




Connecticut officials say people who get their drinking water from 69 small local providers are urged to boil it as officials check whether power outages from Tropical Storm Irene affected the quality.
The state Department of Public Health says most residents get their water from large regional providers, but that customers of smaller providers should check whether they are under a boil-water advisory.
Officials say some larger providers lost power, but had emergency power to ensure filters and other services continued to work. Some smaller providers did not have backup power.
Health officials also say homeowners with private wells in flooded areas should consider having their water tested for contamination.
Information about testing and public water systems can be found at www.ct.gov/dph/ by clicking on "Hurricane Irene: Important Health Information."
Load-Date: September 2, 2011



End of Document


Water Utility Aqua Virginia Lifts Several Boil Water Advisories for Customers East of I-95 Affected by Hurricane Irene
Business Wire
September 2, 2011 Friday 9:51 PM GMT

Copyright 2011 Business Wire, Inc.
Distribution: Business Editors; News Editors; Energy Editors
Length: 286 words
Dateline: ROCKVILLE, Va. 
Body




Aqua Virginia, Inc. (Aqua) has lifted most of the precautionary boil water advisories issued in the wake of Hurricane Irene along the east side of the I-95 Northeast Corridor. Advisories were issued for 46 systems as a precaution when pressure was lost due to power outages.
Aqua mobilized crews and portable generators to restore water service before electric power was restored in many communities. However, even a short term loss of pressure required issuance of precautionary boil water advisories until testing on water samples could be completed to clear the systems.
Six systems remain on boil advisories (expected to be lifted tomorrow, September 3, 2011).
County||System Name||PWS ID#|
Lancaster||Lancaster Shores||VA4103710|
||Town of Lively||VA4103800|
Richmond||Bunker Hill||VA4159175|
||School House Meadows||VA4159800|
Westmoreland||Bushfield||VA4193200|
||Nomini Bay||VA4193675|
Aqua will post updates to the list of precautionary boil water advisories on their website at www.aquaamerica.com . Click on the Virginia home page.
Customers also can call Aqua customer service toll-free at 877.987.2782.
Customers who remain on boil water advisories should boil tap water used for cooking or other purposes where water might be ingested. This would include water used for drinking, brushing teeth, cooking or making ice. Customers can safely consume water after bringing it to a hard boil for one to two minutes, then letting it cool. It is better that young infants and pregnant women use bottled or stored water instead of boiled tap water whenever possible for drinking and cooking.

CONTACT: Aqua Virginia, Inc.
Donna Alston
Director, Communications
610-645-1095
dpalston@aquaamerica.com
or
Greg Odell
President
804-749-8868 Ext. 54411
gkodell@aquaamerica.com
http://www.businesswire.com
Load-Date: September 3, 2011



End of Document


New Jersey American Water Lifts Boil Water Advisory in West Orange and Most of Maplewood and Millburn; Wyoming section of Maplewood and Millburn remain under a boil water advisory
Business Wire
September 2, 2011 Friday 8:46 PM GMT

Copyright 2011 Business Wire, Inc.
Distribution: Community Desks; Business Editors; Energy Writers
Length: 761 words
Dateline: VOORHEES, N.J. 
Body




New Jersey American Water has lifted the boil water advisory for its customers in the Township of Millburn (including Short Hills), the Township of West Orange, and Township of Maplewood with the exception of the Wyoming section of Maplewood and Millburn Township. Customers in those municipalities no longer have to boil water before consumption as water quality results show that the water meets all state and federal water quality standards.
Water pressure to the Maplewood and Millburn highly elevated Wyoming section was restored Thursday evening and customers there remain under a boil water advisory. New Jersey American Water is working to stabilize water pressure and testing water quality before lifting the boil water advisory for the 219 customers impacted on the following streets, west of Wyoming Ave. (Rte. 577):
Customers in the following streets REMAIN UNDER A BOIL WATER ADVISORY:
Maplewood Township:
•	Claremont Avenue, West of Wyoming Ave. (Rte. 577)
•	Collinwood Road, West of Wyoming Ave. (Rte. 577)
•	Collinwood Road South
•	Crestwood Drive
•	Durand Road, West of Wyoming Ave. (Rte. 577)
•	Fairview Terrace
•	Lewis Drive
•	Morse Drive
•	West Lane
•	Sagamore Road, from Mountain Ave to Wyoming Ave. (Rte. 577)
•	Tower Drive
•	Warner Road
•	Woodhill Drive
•	Wyoming Ave (Rte. 577) from Claremont Ave to Woodhill Dr.
Millburn Township
•	Clinton Avenue, from Clinton Place to Sagamore Road
•	Sagamore Road from Mountain Avenue to Fairview Terrace.
NOTE: If customers return to normal water consumption patterns, it will put undue stress on the system and potentially impact our emergency efforts to store stability. New Jersey American Water customers in the impacted areas are required to limit water consumption to essential needs only and discontinue outdoor water use.
"It has certainly been a very challenging week for our customers who remained patient for their water service to be restored," said John Bigelow, president of New Jersey American Water. "We thank them for their understanding and cooperation as we worked and continue to make progress in bringing our water treatment and distribution system back to full strength.
"While the situation has seemingly returned to normal, it is important to remember that the Canoe Brook Water Treatment Plant will not be back at full power for nearly 10 more days. So we again ask for our customers' cooperation in suspending outdoor water use, and use all possible conservation measures indoors."
Customers are strongly encouraged to take the following steps now that the boil water advisory is rescinded:
•	Run your water faucets for 3-5 minutes to flush your service connection and interior plumbing with water from the service main.
•	Empty and clean your automatic ice makers and water chillers.
•	Drain and refill your hot water heater if the temperature is set below 113 degrees Fahrenheit.
•	Service connections with a water softener/cartridge filters should be run through a regeneration cycle or other procedures recommended by the manufacturer.
•	Water reservoirs in tall buildings should be drained and refilled.
The boil water advisory had been in effect since last Sunday when the company's Canoe Brook Water Treatment Plant in Millburn was flooded and lost power as a result of Hurricane Irene. Earlier this week, New Jersey America Water also removed a boil water advisory for the Township of Irvington, Springfield Township, and the City of Summit, which were also impacted in the storm's aftermath.
Customers can continue to visit New Jersey American Water web site for Hurricane Irene Updates at www.newjerseyamwater.com , or on Facebook at            www.facebook.com/newjerseyamericanwater .
New Jersey American Water, a wholly owned subsidiary of American Water (NYSE:AWK), is the largest publicly traded water utility in the state, providing high-quality and reliable water and/or wastewater services to approximately 2.5 million people. Founded in 1886, American Water is the largest publicly traded U.S. water and wastewater utility company. With headquarters in Voorhees, N.J., the company employs more than 7,000 dedicated professionals who provide drinking water, wastewater and other related services to approximately 15 million people in more than 30 states, as well as parts of Canada. More information can be found by visiting www.amwater.com . In 2011, American Water is celebrating its 125th anniversary with a yearlong campaign to promote water efficiency and the importance of protecting water from source to tap. To learn more, visit            www.amwater125.com .

CONTACT: New Jersey American Water
Richard G. Barnes, 856-723-0408
richard.barnes@amwater.com
http://www.businesswire.com
Load-Date: September 3, 2011



End of Document


DPH UPDATES LIST OF PUBLIC WATER SYSTEMS UNDER BOIL WATER ADVISORY
States News Service
September 2, 2011 Friday

Copyright 2011 States News Service
Length: 1040 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: HARTFORD, CT 
Body




The following information was released by the Connecticut Department of Public Health (DPH):
The Department of Public Health updated the list of public water systems under boil water advisory. Currently, 144 small public drinking water systems in the state are under a boil water advisory.
State health officials said it is important that residential customers served by systems that have issued a boil water advisory follow the guidance of their public water system. DPH is monitoring these systems and working to contact other small public drinking water systems to determine their status and offer assistance as needed.
The following public drinking water systems are under a boil water advisory:
Ashford Hills Associates, LLC, Ashford
Perry Hill Estates Apartments Inc. , Ashford
Birch Hills Condominiums , Ashford
Woodlawn Apartments, LLC , Ashford
Mar-Lea Park Apts , Ashford
Ashford Elementary School , Ashford
Foxridge Apartments-Well 1 , Barkhamsted
Foxridge Apartments-Well 2 , Barkhamsted
Bethany Mobile Home Park , Bethany
Elmwood Court LLC , Bethel
Southridge Park Apartments , Bolton
Sunset Apartments , Bolton
168 Boston Turnpike , Bolton
Brooklyn Manor , Brooklyn
The Roseland Rch, LLC , Brooklyn
Gorman Road Apartments , Brooklyn
Longview Estates, LLC , Canterbury
Knollbrook Village Elderly Housing , Canterbury
Campbell Heights Apartments - System #2 , Canterbury
Denlar Apartments , Chester
Cedar Grove Mobile Home Park , Clinton
Evergreen Trailer Park - System #1 , Clinton
Nod Hill Apartments , Clinton
Evergreen Trailer Park - System #2 , Clinton
Evergreen Trailer Park - System #3 , Clinton
Evergreen Trailer Park - System #4 , Clinton
Goodrich Mobile Home Park , Clinton
Colchester Courtyards , Colchester
Kugeman Village , Cornwall
CTWC - Pilgrim Hills Division , Coventry
Twin Hills Water District , Coventry
Pappadella's Restaurant , Danbury
Durham Elderly Housing Division , Durham
Hill Hollow Association , Durham
Whitcraft Corporation , Eastford
Metacomet Homes-Well 1 , East Granby
Metacomet Homes-Well 2 , East Granby
East Haddam Elementary School , East Haddam
Nathan Hale-Ray Middle School , East Haddam
Chatham Apartments , East Hampton
Hemlock Park Associates , Essex
Neipsic Woods Water Association , Glastonbury
Imperial Nursery (Floydville) , Granby
Imperial Nursery (Salmon Brook) , Granby
Whitby School , Greenwich
Greenwich Reform Synagogue , Greenwich
Brunswick Middle School , Greenwich
Lakeview Mobile Home Park , Griswold
River Ridge Golf Course and Restaurant , Griswold
Colonial Efficiency Apartments , Groton
Rogers Mobile Home Park , Groton
Whipples Mobile Home Park , Groton
Quonnipaug Hills - Lower System , Guilford
Quonnipaug Hills - Section I , Guilford
Young Horizons Daycare , Haddam
High Meadow , Haddam
Garden Lane Apartments , Harwinton
Abby Water LLC , Hebron
Hebron Arms Apartments , Hebron
Hillside Condominiums , Hebron
CTWC - Christ Lutheran Church , Hebron
Country Manor Apartments , Hebron
Wellswood Estates Foundation, Inc. , Hebron
Cranberry Bog Apartments , Killingly
Carefree Homeowners Association , Lebanon
Ash Water Company, LLC , Ledyard
Lisbon Mobile Homes , Lisbon
Lyme Consolidated School , Lyme
St. Andrews Episcopal Church , Madison
Birch Mountain Day School , Manchester
White Oak Condominiums , Mansfield
Knollwood Acres Apartments , Mansfield
Orchard Acres Association , Mansfield
Hunting Lodge Apartments , Mansfield
Club House Apartments , Mansfield
Woods Edge Apartments, LLC , Mansfield
Maplewood Apartments , Mansfield
Renwood Condominiums , Mansfield
Carriage House Apartments , Mansfield
Uconn Agronomy Research Farm , Mansfield
Rockridge Condominiums , Mansfield
Hillside Corporation , Marlborough
Marlborough Village Green , Marlborough
Marlborough Tavern Greene , Marlborough
Olde Marlborough Village-Well #2 , Marlborough
Reja - Rainbow Spring Water Company , Middlefield
John Lyman School , Middlefield
Lyman Orchards - Labor Camp , Middlefield
Oakridge Gardens, LLC , Montville
Oakridge Village , Montville
Meadows Apartments , Montville
Mountview Apartments , Montville
Thompson Hill Water Co - Beechwood Acres , Montville
SCWA, Seven Oaks (Oak) , Montville
Candlewood Trails Association , New Milford
Rocky River Business and Professional Ctr , New Milford
Newtown Village , Newtown
Meadowbrook Terrace Mobile Home Park , Newtown
Northford Glen Condominium Association , North Branford
SCWA, Cedar Ridge Division , North Stonington
Stonington Institute - Main Building , North Stonington
Chadwick Homeowners Assn., Inc. , Old Lyme
Mile Creek Apartments , Old Lyme
Old Lyme Country Club House , Old Lyme
Region 18 Schools - Lyme Street , Old Lyme
Boxwood Condominium Association , Old Lyme
Lyme Academy of Fine Arts , Old Lyme
Church of Christ The King , Old Lyme
144 Oxford Road, LLC , Oxford
Westview Terrace Mobile Home Park , Plainfield
Moosup Garden Apartments , Plainfield
Hanson Pipe And Precast , Plainfield
Jumbo Apartments , Plainfield
Moosup Manor , Plainfield
Arnio Lake Realty LLC , Plainfield
Rural Wat Co-Ridgefield Lakes-Main Sys , Ridgefield
Rural Wat Co-Ridgefield Lakes-Well #4 , Ridgefield
Rural Wat Co-Ridgefield Lakes-Well #11 , Ridgefield
Salem Manor Condominiums, System #1 , Salem
Crystal Lake Condominiums , Salem
Salem Manor Condominiums, System #2 , Salem
McDonalds Restaurant , Stafford
Baxter Farms Community Water Assoc , Tolland
Eastview Kozley Water Association , Tolland
Norwegian Woods Apartments , Tolland
Stone Pond Condominiums , Tolland
Village At Crystal Springs , Tolland
Ivy Woods , Tolland
Clinton Nurseries - Primary System , Westbrook
Clinton Nurseries - Secondary System , Westbrook
Willington Oaks Apartments , Willington
Walden Apartments , Willington
North Willington Village Condo Assoc. , Willington
Phelps Crossing Commercial , Willington
Willington Ridge Condos - System #1 , Willington
Willington Ridge Condos - System #2 , Willington
Wyndham Park Apartments , Windham
Wolcott High School , Wolcott
Heritage Hill Condominium Assn, Inc , Woodbury
Woodbury Place Condominium Assn , Woodbury
Brookwood Apartments - System #2 , Woodstock
Woodstock Meadows Condominium Assn. , Woodstock
Brookwood Apartments - System #1 , Woodstock
Fawn Ridge Association Inc. , Woodstock
The updated list of public water systems under a boil water advisory is also available online at www.ct.gov/dph/ (click on "Hurricane Irene: Important Health Information.")
Load-Date: September 6, 2011



End of Document


DPH Updates List of Public Water Systems under Boil Water Advisory
Targeted News Service
September 2, 2011 Friday 1:47 AM  EST

Copyright 2011 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 1124 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: HARTFORD, Conn. 
Body




The Connecticut Department of Public Health issued the following news release:
The Department of Public Health updated the list of public water systems under boil water advisory. Currently, 144 small public drinking water systems in the state are under a boil water advisory.
State health officials said it is important that residential customers served by systems that have issued a boil water advisory follow the guidance of their public water system. DPH is monitoring these systems and working to contact other small public drinking water systems to determine their status and offer assistance as needed.
The following public drinking water systems are under a boil water advisory:
* Ashford Hills Associates, LLC, Ashford
* Perry Hill Estates Apartments Inc., Ashford
* Birch Hills Condominiums, Ashford
* Woodlawn Apartments, LLC, Ashford
* Mar-Lea Park Apts, Ashford
* Ashford Elementary School, Ashford
* Foxridge Apartments-Well 1, Barkhamsted
* Foxridge Apartments-Well 2, Barkhamsted
* Bethany Mobile Home Park, Bethany
* Elmwood Court LLC, Bethel
* Southridge Park Apartments, Bolton
* Sunset Apartments, Bolton
* 168 Boston Turnpike, Bolton
* Brooklyn Manor, Brooklyn
* The Roseland Rch, LLC, Brooklyn
* Gorman Road Apartments, Brooklyn
* Longview Estates, LLC, Canterbury
* Knollbrook Village Elderly Housing, Canterbury
* Campbell Heights Apartments - System #2, Canterbury
* Denlar Apartments, Chester
* Cedar Grove Mobile Home Park, Clinton
* Evergreen Trailer Park - System #1, Clinton
* Nod Hill Apartments, Clinton
* Evergreen Trailer Park - System #2, Clinton
* Evergreen Trailer Park - System #3, Clinton
* Evergreen Trailer Park - System #4, Clinton
* Goodrich Mobile Home Park, Clinton
* Colchester Courtyards, Colchester
* Kugeman Village, Cornwall
* CTWC - Pilgrim Hills Division, Coventry
* Twin Hills Water District, Coventry
* Pappadella's Restaurant, Danbury
* Durham Elderly Housing Division, Durham
* Hill Hollow Association, Durham
* Whitcraft Corporation, Eastford
* Metacomet Homes-Well 1, East Granby
* Metacomet Homes-Well 2, East Granby
* East Haddam Elementary School, East Haddam
* Nathan Hale-Ray Middle School, East Haddam
* Chatham Apartments, East Hampton
* Hemlock Park Associates, Essex
* Neipsic Woods Water Association, Glastonbury
* Imperial Nursery (Floydville), Granby
* Imperial Nursery (Salmon Brook), Granby
* Whitby School, Greenwich
* Greenwich Reform Synagogue, Greenwich
* Brunswick Middle School, Greenwich
* Lakeview Mobile Home Park, Griswold
* River Ridge Golf Course & Restaurant, Griswold
* Colonial Efficiency Apartments, Groton
* Rogers Mobile Home Park, Groton
* Whipples Mobile Home Park, Groton
* Quonnipaug Hills - Lower System, Guilford
* Quonnipaug Hills - Section I, Guilford
* Young Horizons Daycare, Haddam
* High Meadow, Haddam
* Garden Lane Apartments, Harwinton
* Abby Water LLC, Hebron
* Hebron Arms Apartments, Hebron
* Hillside Condominiums, Hebron
* CTWC - Christ Lutheran Church, Hebron
* Country Manor Apartments, Hebron
* Wellswood Estates Foundation, Inc., Hebron
* Cranberry Bog Apartments, Killingly
* Carefree Homeowners Association, Lebanon
* Ash Water Company, LLC, Ledyard
* Lisbon Mobile Homes, Lisbon
* Lyme Consolidated School, Lyme
* St. Andrews Episcopal Church, Madison
* Birch Mountain Day School, Manchester
* White Oak Condominiums, Mansfield
* Knollwood Acres Apartments, Mansfield
* Orchard Acres Association, Mansfield
* Hunting Lodge Apartments, Mansfield
* Club House Apartments, Mansfield
* Woods Edge Apartments, LLC, Mansfield
* Maplewood Apartments, Mansfield
* Renwood Condominiums, Mansfield
* Carriage House Apartments, Mansfield
* Uconn Agronomy Research Farm, Mansfield
* Rockridge Condominiums, Mansfield
* Hillside Corporation, Marlborough
* Marlborough Village Green, Marlborough
* Marlborough Tavern Greene, Marlborough
* Olde Marlborough Village-Well #2, Marlborough
* Reja - Rainbow Spring Water Company, Middlefield
* John Lyman School, Middlefield
* Lyman Orchards - Labor Camp, Middlefield
* Oakridge Gardens, LLC, Montville
* Oakridge Village, Montville
* Meadows Apartments, Montville
* Mountview Apartments, Montville
* Thompson Hill Water Co - Beechwood Acres, Montville
* SCWA, Seven Oaks (Oak), Montville
* Candlewood Trails Association, New Milford
* Rocky River Business & Professional Ctr, New Milford
* Newtown Village, Newtown
* Meadowbrook Terrace Mobile Home Park, Newtown
* Northford Glen Condominium Association, North Branford
* SCWA, Cedar Ridge Division, North Stonington
* Stonington Institute - Main Building, North Stonington
* Chadwick Homeowners Assn., Inc., Old Lyme
* Mile Creek Apartments, Old Lyme
* Old Lyme Country Club House, Old Lyme
* Region 18 Schools - Lyme Street, Old Lyme
* Boxwood Condominium Association, Old Lyme
* Lyme Academy of Fine Arts, Old Lyme
* Church of Christ The King, Old Lyme
* 144 Oxford Road, LLC, Oxford
* Westview Terrace Mobile Home Park, Plainfield
* Moosup Garden Apartments, Plainfield
* Hanson Pipe And Precast, Plainfield
* Jumbo Apartments, Plainfield
* Moosup Manor, Plainfield
* Arnio Lake Realty LLC, Plainfield
* Rural Wat Co-Ridgefield Lakes-Main Sys, Ridgefield
* Rural Wat Co-Ridgefield Lakes-Well #4, Ridgefield
* Rural Wat Co-Ridgefield Lakes-Well #11, Ridgefield
* Salem Manor Condominiums, System #1, Salem
* Crystal Lake Condominiums, Salem
* Salem Manor Condominiums, System #2, Salem
* McDonalds Restaurant, Stafford
* Baxter Farms Community Water Assoc, Tolland
* Eastview Kozley Water Association, Tolland
* Norwegian Woods Apartments, Tolland
* Stone Pond Condominiums, Tolland
* Village At Crystal Springs, Tolland
* Ivy Woods, Tolland
* Clinton Nurseries - Primary System, Westbrook
* Clinton Nurseries - Secondary System, Westbrook
* Willington Oaks Apartments, Willington
* Walden Apartments, Willington
* North Willington Village Condo Assoc., Willington
* Phelps Crossing Commercial, Willington
* Willington Ridge Condos - System #1, Willington
* Willington Ridge Condos - System #2, Willington
* Wyndham Park Apartments, Windham
* Wolcott High School, Wolcott
* Heritage Hill Condominium Assn, Inc, Woodbury
* Woodbury Place Condominium Assn, Woodbury
* Brookwood Apartments - System #2, Woodstock
* Woodstock Meadows Condominium Assn., Woodstock
* Brookwood Apartments - System #1, Woodstock
* Fawn Ridge Association Inc., Woodstock
The updated list of public water systems under a boil water advisory is also available online at www.ct.gov/dph/ (click on "Hurricane Irene: Important Health Information.")
The Connecticut Department of Public Health is the state's leader in public health policy and advocacy with a mission to protect and promote the health and safety of the people of our state. To contact the department, please visit its website at www.ct.gov/dph or call (860) 509-7270.
Contact: William Gerrish, 860/509-7270
Copyright Targeted News Services
TNS mv45 110903-3564923
Load-Date: September 3, 2011



End of Document


NC governor meets farmers as damage total grows
The Associated Press State & Local Wire
September 2, 2011 Friday 1:33 AM GMT

Copyright 2011 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 758 words
Byline: By GARY D. ROBERTSON, Associated Press
Dateline: PINETOPS N.C.
Body




Damage estimates for North Carolina inched over $190 million Thursday as teams assessing the impact of Hurricane Irene tallied the costs and more counties were added to the list of those whose residents and businesses could receive federal financial help.
Edgecombe County farmers suffered at least $44 million in crop damage from last weekend's storm, the local cooperative extension office said Thursday. The farm-service agency said 70 percent of the county's 8,500 acres of tobacco was damaged. Local farmers said the estimate is low.
The statewide damage estimate was expected to grow as counties report their figures, state emergency management spokesman Ernie Seneca said.
Meanwhile, local governments reported that their costs for removing debris and making infrastructure repairs will be about $40 million, Gov. Beverly Perdue's office said. The new, $192 million figure includes a Martin County crop damage estimate Wednesday of $37 million and a preliminary damage estimate made by the governor of more than $71 million.
Perdue's office said the federal government on Thursday added Halifax and Lenoir to the list of seven counties Beaufort, Carteret, Craven, Dare, Hyde, Pamlico and Tyrrell already approved by President Barack Obama for individual assistance. Such assistance includes grants and low-interest loans for individuals and businesses harmed by the storm.
Perdue also announced Thursday that the state has secured federal approval for public assistance for 20 counties to compensate local governments for removing debris and making infrastructure repairs.
The 20 counties are: Beaufort, Brunswick, Carteret, Chowan, Columbus, Craven, Dare, Duplin, Edgecombe, Halifax, Hyde, Jones, Lenoir, Martin, Nash, Onslow, Pamlico, Pender, Tyrrell and Wilson.
Perdue sought to emphasize the storm's toll on farmers with a visit Thursday with an Edgecombe County tobacco farmer. She used the visit to sign an executive order that will make it easier for state crews to remove storm debris from farmland and for farmers to burn storm-related trash.
At Pitt Farms outside Pinetops, as much as about 100 acres of tobacco appeared lost after Irene's high winds shredded leaves and turned them yellow and brown. Farmer Bert Pitt said he was able to harvest about 20 acres of his tobacco, working even in the rain to salvage a portion of his crop.
"What can you get from this field?" Perdue asked Pitt, looking out over remaining rows of unharvested tobacco plants.
"Heartache," Pitt responded.
Other farmers visiting with Perdue asked her to intervene with federal and state governments for help, saying insurance won't cover losses and federal programs don't offer much immediate help beyond more borrowing.
"We're going to need some kind of help," said Richard Anderson, a tobacco grower in Tarboro. "Those of us in the tobacco industry are the first to be taxed and we'd just like some of our tax dollars to come back and help us."
The governor told local and state agriculture officials to assemble a letter she can forward to U.S. Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack to highlight urgent needs and ways to end a logjam in applications for disaster relief.
"We've got to really just stand up and fight," Perdue said.
On the coast, tourist areas readied for Labor Day visitors and many Outer Banks beaches were ready for the holiday. Corolla officials said their beach was closed because of debris and, on Thursday, also cautioned of rip currents.
About 15 miles south, the beach at Duck was open and workers were collecting debris that was washing up, Dare County spokeswoman Dorothy Toolan said, but all beaches were open on Bodie Island.
Boil-water advisories were removed for the length of the county's barrier islands, Toolan said.
Dare also announced it planned a staged re-entry for Hatteras Island residents starting Sunday morning, depending on where people live. The plan initially is for Buxton, Hatteras Village and Frisco residents to be able to return home via ferry in alphabetical order by their surnames. Some 2,500 people stayed on the island during the storm and road access to the mainland was cut off by breaches in Highway 12.
The number of electric utility customers without power due to the storm had fallen to about 26,000, compared to the peak of about 600,000 last weekend. Roughly half the outages were in northeastern North Carolina in areas served by Dominion North Carolina Power.
Online:
Hatteras re-entry details: http://www.co.dare.nc.us/EmgyMgmt/Alert/index.asp
Associated Press Writer Emery P. Dalesio contributed to this report.
Load-Date: September 2, 2011



End of Document


Nearly a Week Later, Thousands in the Region Still Lack Access to Clean Water
The New York Times
September 3, 2011 Saturday
Late Edition - Final

Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 22
Length: 787 words
Byline: By MOSI SECRET
Body




KILLINGWORTH, Conn. -- Gurmeet Singh thought that she had squirreled away enough water. In her preparations before Tropical Storm Irene, Ms. Singh, whose house has water supplied by a private well, filled her largest pots and the hot tub to the brim. That should have been enough to flush the toilets for a couple of days if the well's pump lost power.
But nearly a week after the storm, she is still without running water. Her neighborhood continues to lack electricity, so the well will not operate. And even when the power returns, she will need to test and possibly treat the water to make sure it has not been contaminated by road oil, chemicals and bacteria carried by floodwaters during the storm.
''I have two little kids, and they are really understanding the importance of water,'' Ms. Singh, 36, said as she waited to receive water from a tanker in a commuter parking lot in Killingworth. A steady stream of people arrived for water, some after taking showers at a nearby school.
Across the New York region, thousands of people are still carting plastic jugs, soda bottles and any handy receptacle to water filling stations because they either cannot gain access to water or fear that their water is unsafe to drink. Officials in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut are trying to test and confirm that water supplies are potable, but they say it might take several days more.
In Connecticut, the impact of the storm on water supplies has varied. Rural areas with wells, like the town of Clinton, where Ms. Singh and her family live, appear to be the worst hit because of the loss of power.
But officials across the region are urging homeowners with wells in flooded areas to disinfect them, power or not.
States generally do not regulate private well water, so residents are on their own. ''There is no real record of who might or might not be having problems,'' said Larry Ragonese, a spokesman for the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
Water systems run by large municipalities do not appear to have been affected. But on Friday, Connecticut's Department of Public Health placed 144 small public water systems under boil-water advisories because treatment at the systems stopped for varying amounts of time when the facilities lost power.
Unlike larger public systems, many of the smaller ones, which serve no more than 1,000 customers, do not have backup generators.
The systems will remain under the advisories until tests confirm that the water is safe, said William Garrish, a spokesman for the health department. Several systems were removed from the list, but many more were added as officials surveyed water suppliers in the eastern parts of the state.
Connecticut Water, which runs several smaller systems and has two systems on the advisory list, expects to receive test results for all of its systems by the beginning of next week, Dan Meaney, a spokesman for the company, said.
In New York, the State Department of Health shut the water supply at seven public systems. Residents in parts of Clinton, Dutchess, Warren, Greene and Orange Counties were relying on water from tankers or from neighboring supply systems.
Officials in New York reported that turbidity levels -- a measure of the cloudiness of water -- were significantly higher than normal as a result of the storm. Untreated sewage has flowed into waterways that feed the state's water supplies.
The state issued 78 boil-water notices, according to Jeffrey Gordon, a spokesman for the Health Department. Nineteen of the orders have since been lifted.
The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection issued advisories for residents in eight municipalities.
Here in Killingworth, a bucolic town about 100 miles northeast of New York City and 10 miles north of the Long Island Sound, there were no visible signs of major damage from the storm. Fallen branches littered the shoulders of the roads, but the buildings did not look beaten by the wind and showed no signs that the weather was anything but sunny.
The tanker that was dispensing water was sitting on a lot in a quiet spot. Drivers climbed out of their cars with containers under their arms -- anything without holes. They kneeled at the back of the tank and twisted the spigot, releasing a stream of clean water -- once so commonplace.
Connecticut Water, which provided water at the site and two other locations, said people were drawing about 6,000 gallons a day from the tanker.
Cathy Gazikas, 53, of Essex, Conn., said she did not waste a drop. She said she gathered half-finished bottles from around her house and used them to fill the toilet tanks and water her vegetable garden. Still, she said she had to return each day for more.
''This is the worst,'' Ms. Gazikas said.
http://www.nytimes.com
Graphic



 
PHOTO: Cheryl Sweeney, of Killingworth, Conn., filling containers from a tanker of water. Rural areas with wells were the worst hit. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRISTOPHER CAPOZZIELLO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)                                                        
Load-Date: September 3, 2011



End of Document


New Jersey American Water Lifts Boil Water Advisory for ALL Impacted Customers in Essex and Union Counties
Business Wire
September 3, 2011 Saturday 6:23 PM GMT

Copyright 2011 Business Wire, Inc.
Distribution: Business Editors; Environment Writers
Length: 617 words
Dateline: VOORHEES, N.J. 
Body




New Jersey American Water has lifted the boil water advisory for all of its impacted customers in Essex and Union Counties.
Customers in the Township of Irvington, the Township of Maplewood, the Township of Millburn (including Short Hills), Springfield Township, the City of Summit, and the Township of West Orange no longer have to boil water before consumption as water quality results for bacteriological samples show that the water meets all state and federal water quality standards. This notice includes all New Jersey American Water customers in the Wyoming sections of Millburn and Maplewood.
The company has also discontinued its bottled water distribution stations.
NOTE: If customers return to normal water consumption patterns, it will put undue stress on the system and potentially impact our emergency efforts to restore stability.
New Jersey American Water customers in the impacted areas (towns listed above) are required to continue to limit water consumption to essential needs only and discontinue outdoor water use.
"It has certainly been a very challenging week for our customers who remained patient for their water service to be restored," said John Bigelow, president of New Jersey American Water. "We thank our customers for their understanding and cooperation as we worked to restore service.
"While the situation has seemingly returned to normal, it is important to remember that the Canoe Brook Water Treatment Plant will not be back at full service for nearly 10 more days. So we again ask for our customers' cooperation in suspending outdoor water use, and use all possible conservation measures indoors."
Customers are strongly encouraged to take the following steps now that the boil water advisory is rescinded:
•	Run your water faucets for 3-5 minutes to flush your service connection and interior plumbing with water from the service main.
•	Empty and clean your automatic ice makers and water chillers.
•	Drain and refill your hot water heater if the temperature is set below 113 degrees Fahrenheit.
•	Service connections with a water softener/cartridge filters should be run through a regeneration cycle or other procedures recommended by the manufacturer.
•	Water reservoirs in tall buildings should be drained and refilled.
The boil water advisory had been in effect since last Sunday when the company's Canoe Brook Water Treatment Plant in Millburn was severely flooded and lost power as a result of Hurricane Irene.
Customers can continue to visit New Jersey American Water web site for Hurricane Irene Updates at www.newjerseyamwater.com , or on Facebook at            www.facebook.com/newjerseyamericanwater . Customers also can continue to contact New Jersey American Water 24 hours a day at 800-652-6987 with any service issues.
New Jersey American Water, a wholly owned subsidiary of American Water (NYSE:AWK), is the largest publicly traded water utility in the state, providing high-quality and reliable water and/or wastewater services to approximately 2.5 million people. Founded in 1886, American Water is the largest publicly traded U.S. water and wastewater utility company. With headquarters in Voorhees, N.J., the company employs more than 7,000 dedicated professionals who provide drinking water, wastewater and other related services to approximately 15 million people in more than 30 states, as well as parts of Canada. More information can be found by visiting www.amwater.com .In 2011, American Water is celebrating its 125th anniversary with a yearlong campaign to promote water efficiency and the importance of protecting water from source to tap. To learn more, visit            www.amwater125.com .

CONTACT: New Jersey American Water
Richard G. Barnes, 856-723-0408
richard.barnes@amwater.com
http://www.businesswire.com
Load-Date: September 4, 2011



End of Document


No Headline In Original
Canadian Press
September 3, 2011 Saturday 09:00 AM EST

Copyright 2011 The Canadian Press All Rights Reserved

Section: PRAIRIES/BC
Length: 661 words
Byline: The Canadian Press
Body




(BC-Stanley-Cup-Riot-NHL)
Vancouver's Stanley Cup riot is fuelling a debate over whether professional sports teams have a responsibility to pay for public celebrations in their honour.
Two reports into the riot, released this week, recommend the city partner with the N-H-L and local franchises to ensure the safest celebrations possible.
Business professor Richard Powers questions why the league or the Canucks have any responsibility for what happens outside the arena, saying they are only providing a form of entertainment: hockey.
But Nathaniel Payne, a business professor at Simon Fraser University, argues it would be unfair to expect the city alone to bear the risk of large celebrations when the Canucks make the playoffs. (The Canadian Press)
---
---
(BC-Wolf-Hunt)
The B-C government is defending its decision to indefinitely open a wolf-hunting season in the Cariboo as ranchers and First Nations report increasing numbers of cattle being killed.
Critics have suggested the decision this summer to lift restrictions on wolf hunting is bad management and based on poor science.
Rodger Stewart, director of resource management for the area, says the number of wolves has created an imbalance in the ecosystem, and insists the hunt is about managing the species' population.
Al Ley of the Conservation Officer Service says the open-season hunt is specific to areas where livestock activity is the heaviest, and where wolves are preying on the cattle. (The Canadian Press)
---
---
(BC-Road-Race)
More street racing charges against inexperienced young drivers in the Vancouver area, this time involving a B-M-W and Porsche clocked at 143 kilometres an hour.
The West Vancouver Police say the cars were spotted yesterday morning in a 60-kilometre zone, and shortly after the B-M-W was found in a ditch with about 15-thousand dollars of damage.
A news release says both vehicles were impounded for street racing, and the two drivers, who were designated novice drivers, have been banned from driving for 15 days.
Earlier in the week, a group of young men who were also considered novice drivers had their exotic cars impounded, after a group of vehicles that included Ferraris and Lamborghinis were spotted racing south of Vancouver. (News1130)
---
---
(BC-Fatal-Crash-Charges)
A 39-year-old man from Kelowna has been charged in a year-old crash near Enderby that killed a 17-year-old.
Donovan Pippus was killed in September of last year when an oncoming vehicle crossed the centre lane and slammed into his Pontiac Sunbird.
Jean-Paul Kowal of Kelowna has now been charged with dangerous driving causing death, impaired driving causing death and causing an accident resulting in death.
He's scheduled to appear in provincial court in Salmon Arm on September 27th. (CKIZ)
---
---
(BC-Boil-Water)
Residents in the Vernon area are being told to boil their water after tests showed bacteria.
The boil-water advisory is in place for about 25-thousand customers with the Greater Vernon Water Utility.
Al Cotsworth of the Regional District of the North Okanagan says a number of tests have come back showing bacteria, but none of that bacteria was fecal or ecoli.
Cotsworth says the problem is likely linked to Kal Lake's annual marl process that sees calcium carbonate in liquid form come out as a fine dust, which gives the lake its blue colour. (CKIZ)
---
---
(Yukon-Sled-Dog-Rescue)
A sled-dog rescue facility in Whitehorse is already caring for 35 animals after opening in June.
The Sled Dog Rescue Sanctuary is the first of its kind in Whitehorse, giving rescued dogs a place to live before pairing them with new owners.
The sanctuary is run by former competitive dog sled racer Cristy Willett and takes dogs through throughout the Yukon and Northwest Territories.
The welfare of sled dogs has been in the news in recent months after allegations that a sled dog operator near Whistler, B-C, slaughtered dozens of dogs and buried them in a mass grave. (Whitehorse Star)
---
---
(B-C Update by James Keller)
Load-Date: September 4, 2011



End of Document


Water Utility Aqua Virginia Lifts Several Boil Water Advisories for Customers East of I-95 Affected by Hurricane Irene; Bunker Hill customers remain on boil advisory
Business Wire
September 4, 2011 Sunday 4:52 AM GMT

Copyright 2011 Business Wire, Inc.
Distribution: Business Editors; Energy Editors; Music Editors
Length: 272 words
Dateline: ROCKVILLE, Va. 
Body




Aqua Virginia, Inc. (Aqua) has lifted nearly all boil water advisories issued in the wake of Hurricane Irene along the east side of the I-95 Northeast Corridor. Advisories were issued for 46 systems as a precaution when pressure was lost due to power outages.
Aqua mobilized crews and portable generators to restore water service before electric power was restored in many communities. However, even a short term loss of pressure required issuance of precautionary boil water advisories until testing on water samples could be completed to clear the systems. As of today, only one system, Bunker Hill (PWS ID# VA4159175) in Richmond County, remains on boil advisory.
Customers who remain on boil water advisories should boil tap water used for cooking or other purposes where water might be ingested. This would include water used for drinking, brushing teeth, cooking or making ice. Customers can safely consume water after bringing it to a hard boil for one to two minutes, then letting it cool. It is better that young infants and pregnant women use bottled or stored water instead of boiled tap water whenever possible for drinking and cooking.
Aqua will post the names of water systems that are under a precautionary boil water advisory on our Web site at www.aquaamerica.com and update the site when we lift boil advisories. Click on the Virginia home page. Customers also can call Aqua customer service toll-free at 877.987.2782.

CONTACT: Aqua Virginia, Inc.
Joanna Oszeyczik, Communications Specialist, 610-306-8670
jaoszeyczik@aquaamerica.com
or
Aqua Virginia, Inc.
Greg Odell, President, 804-749-8868 Ext. 54411
gkodell@aquaamerica.com
http://www.businesswire.com
Load-Date: September 5, 2011



End of Document


Wildfires rip through sun-scorched Texas
CNN.com
September 5, 2011 Monday 1:43 PM EST

Copyright 2011 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved

Section: U.S.
Length: 742 words
Byline: By the CNN Wire Staff
Dateline: Bastrop, Texas 
Body




Firefighters southeast of Austin, Texas, battled strong winds Monday as they struggled to gain ground against a fast-moving wildfire that has so far scorched some 25,000 acres and destroyed close to 500 homes.
Another fire in eastern Texas killed a mother and her 18-month-old child when flames engulfed their mobile home Sunday near Gladewater, the Gregg County Sheriff's Department said.
"We got a long way to go to get this thing contained," Gov. Rick Perry said about the fire raging near Austin. "I have seen a number of big fires in my life. This one is as mean looking as I've ever seen."
Dozens of fires are burning across the parched state, the Texas Forest Service said Monday.
Earlier, the governor issued a statement in which he called the wildfire situation in Texas "severe" and said that all state resources were being made available to protect lives and property.
"We will pick up the pieces. We always do," he told reporters.
Texas is battling its worst fire season in state history. A record 3.5 million acres -- an area roughly the size of Connecticut, Perry said -- have burned since the start of the season in November as hot and dry weather, coupled with a historic drought, made conditions ripe for rapid fire growth.
"It's a very serious, scary situation," said Jan Amen, a Texas Forest Service spokeswoman. "The drought has gone on so long -- it's just bone dry. Anything that catches fire takes off."
Over the weekend, officials said low relative humidity and strong winds from Lee, which made landfall as a tropical storm but then weakened, further fanned the flames.
A red flag warning was in effect for much of east, south and central Texas on Monday, with wind gusts of up to 35 mph in places, according to the National Weather Service.
A fire broke out about 45 miles north of Houston Monday afternoon. It was moving between 15 and 20 mph and threatening homes, said Rhonda Reinholz with the Magnolia Volunteer Fire Department.
Another fire burned in the Steiner Ranch subdivision in Travis County, forcing families out of their homes. Justin Allen evacuated from there with his five kids. Though he does not think the flames will reach their house, which is tucked near the back of the development, they are close enough to worry about, he said.
"It's pretty scary," said Allen. "And it's really sad for everyone that's in that path."
The outbreak of wildfires prompted Perry to return to Texas from South Carolina, where he was scheduled to participate in a forum for Republican presidential candidates.
The massive, uncontained fire in Bastrop County, near Austin, was the state's largest Monday. It destroyed 476 homes, according to Bastrop County Judge Ronnie McDonald, and threatened about 1,000 others, officials with the forest service's incident management team reported. About 5,000 residents evacuated as flames approached, officials said.
Lisa Ross learned she needed to leave her Bastrop home when her husband called 911 after realizing a looming fire had darkened the skies above.
"You learn what is valuable in life, and it isn't the stuff," she said. "It's people in your life, and what means something to you."
Cars crammed with belongings and pets packed a gas station on a highway near Austin, attorney Jonathan A. Zendeh Del said. "I've lived in Texas almost all my life, and I've never seen a fire that big in central Texas," he said.
Officials issued a boil water notice for parts of Bastrop Monday. Dark clouds of smoke billowing across the sky could be seen miles from the fire.
Satellite images Monday showed the fire stretching over about 25,000 acres, jumping the Colorado River and a highway, the Texas Forest Service said.
More evacuations are likely as the fire spreads, officials said. Already, hundreds of people are in shelters as dangerous flames keep them from finding out whether their homes survived.
"We have been told already from three people that live in that area that our house has been burnt. I had a gut feeling that it did not, but now it's looking worse and worse," said Gisele Vocal, an evacuee. "We just have to wait now."
Firefighters used Black Hawk helicopters to douse flames with a mixture of water and fire retardant Monday, officials said.
The fire forced parts of state highways 71 and 21 to shut and additional road closures were expected.
At least 63 new fires across Texas on Sunday burned nearly 33,000 acres, the state's fire service said. Fires were reported in at least 17 counties.
Load-Date: September 9, 2011



End of Document


DPH Updates List of Public Water Systems under Boil Water Advisory
Targeted News Service
September 5, 2011 Monday 10:41 PM  EST

Copyright 2011 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 877 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: HARTFORD, Conn. 
Body




The Connecticut Department of Public Health issued the following news release:
The Department of Public Health updated the list of public water systems under boil water advisory. Currently, 100 small public drinking water systems in the state are under a boil water advisory.
State health officials said it is important that residential customers served by systems that have issued a boil water advisory follow the guidance of their public water system. DPH is monitoring these systems and working to contact other small public drinking water systems to determine their status and offer assistance as needed.
The following public drinking water systems are under a boil water advisory:
* Woodlawn Apartments, LLC, Ashford
* Mar-Lea Park Apts, Ashford
* Elmwood Court LLC, Bethel
* Southridge Park Apartments, Bolton
* Sunset Apartments, Bolton
* 168 Boston Turnpike, Bolton
* Brooklyn Manor, Brooklyn
* Longview Estates, LLC, Canterbury
* Campbell Heights Apartments - System #2, Canterbury
* Chapco, Inc., Chester
* Aaron Manor Nursing & Rehab Center, Chester
* Denlar Apartments, Chester
* Evergreen Trailer Park - System #4, Clinton
* Goodrich Mobile Home Park, Clinton
* State Police Fleet Maintenance, Colchester
* Colchester Courtyards, Colchester
* Twin Hills Water District, Coventry
* Coventry Grammar School, Coventry
* East Haddam Elementary School, East Haddam
* Nathan Hale-Ray Middle School, East Haddam
* Chatham Apartments, East Hampton
* Lakeshore, LLC, East Hampton
* Lakeview Court, LLC, East Hampton
* Global Self Storage, East Hampton
* Theater Square, East Hampton
* Inncom International, East Lyme
* Hemlock Park Associates, Essex
* Whitby School, Greenwich
* Greenwich Reform Synagogue, Greenwich
* Colonial Efficiency Apartments, Groton
* Rogers Mobile Home Park, Groton
* Whipples Mobile Home Park, Groton
* Quonnipaug Hills - Lower System, Guilford
* Melissa Jones School - Well #1, Guilford
* Quonnipaug Hills - Section I, Guilford
* Melissa Jones School - Well #2, Guilford
* Guilford Veterinary Hospital, Guilford
* Young Horizons Daycare, Haddam
* Hampton Elementary School, Hampton
* Abby Water LLC, Hebron
* Hebron Arms Apartments, Hebron
* Wellswood Estates Foundation, Inc., Hebron
* Cranberry Bog Apartments, Killingly
* Carefree Homeowners Association, Lebanon
* Ash Water Company, LLC, Ledyard
* Lisbon Mobile Homes, Lisbon
* Round Hill LLC - Well# 1, Lisbon
* Round Hill LLC - Well# 2, Lisbon
* 7 Orchard Park Industrial Area, Madison
* 1 Orchard Park Industrial Area, Madison
* 15 Orchard Park Industrial Area, Madison
* Orchard Park Ind. Area - 50 Mungertown, Madison
* St. Andrews Episcopal Church, Madison
* Woods Edge Apartments, LLC, Mansfield
* Carriage House Apartments, Mansfield
* Valley View, LLC, Mansfield
* Mansfield Village, LLC, Mansfield
* Uconn Agronomy Research Farm, Mansfield
* Community Childrens Center, Mansfield
* Reja - Rainbow Spring Water Company, Middlefield
* Lyman Orchards - Labor Camp, Middlefield
* Oakridge Gardens, LLC, Montville
* Oakridge Village, Montville
* Mountview Apartments, Montville
* Fox Laurel Mobile Home Park, LLC, Montville
* Stony Brook Mobile Home Park, Montville
* Thompson Hill Water Co - Beechwood Acres, Montville
* SCWA, Seven Oaks (Oak), Montville
* Candlewood Trails Association, New Milford
* SCWA, Cedar Ridge Division, North Stonington
* Stonington Institute - Main Building, North Stonington
* Chadwick Homeowners Assn., Inc., Old Lyme
* Mile Creek Apartments, Old Lyme
* Old Lyme Country Club House, Old Lyme
* Boxwood Condominium Association, Old Lyme
* 144 Oxford Road, LLC, Oxford
* Westview Terrace Mobile Home Park, Plainfield
* Moosup Garden Apartments, Plainfield
* Hanson Pipe And Precast, Plainfield
* Jumbo Apartments, Plainfield
* Moosup Manor, Plainfield
* Arnio Lake Realty LLC, Plainfield
* Salem Manor Condominiums, System #1, Salem
* Salem Manor Condominiums, System #2, Salem
* Eastview Kozley Water Association, Tolland
* Norwegian Woods Apartments, Tolland
* Stone Pond Condominiums, Tolland
* Meeting House Commons, Tolland
* U.S. Department of Agriculture - Tolland, Tolland
* Ivy Woods, Tolland
* Clinton Nurseries - Primary System, Westbrook
* Clinton Nurseries - Secondary System, Westbrook
* Walden Apartments, Willington
* North Willington Village Condo Assoc., Willington
* Willington Ridge Condos - System #1, Willington
* Willington Ridge Condos - System #2, Willington
* Heritage Hill Condominium Assn, Inc, Woodbury
* Woodbury Place Condominium Assn, Woodbury
* Brookwood Apartments - System #2, Woodstock
* Brookwood Apartments - System #1, Woodstock
The updated list of public water systems under a boil water advisory is also available online at www.ct.gov/dph/ (click on "Hurricane Irene: Important Health Information.")
Homeowners with private wells flooded or damaged by the storm should consider their wells contaminated and disinfect their wells before resuming their use. Information on private wells, as well as a list of laboratories certified to test drinking water open this holiday weekend, is available online at www.ct.gov/dph/ (click on "Hurricane Irene: Important Health Information.") DPH Environmental Health staff is also available to answer questions over the long weekend from 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. by calling (860) 509-8000.
Contact: William Gerrish, 860/509-7270
Copyright Targeted News Services
TNS m45 110907-3567869
Load-Date: September 7, 2011



End of Document


AFTER THE FLOOD SAFE DRINKING WATER ADVISORY
States News Service
September 6, 2011 Tuesday

Copyright 2011 States News Service
Length: 371 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: BURLINGTON, VT 
Body




The following information was released by the Vermont Department of Health:
The Vermont Department of Health is offering free water test kits for residents with private drinking water wells that may have been contaminated with floodwaters.
If your private drinking water well was covered with floodwater, is located very near a flooded area, or there is a change in quality odor or taste assume that it is contaminated, take all precautions and get it tested, said Health Commissioner Harry Chen, MD.
Contact your Health Department district office or town health officer for a free test kit and disinfection instructions. Water samples must be submitted to the Health Department Laboratory according to instructions in the kit, and must be clearly marked contaminated by flooding. Be sure to write your name and address so that results will be mailed directly to you.
You can also order a test kit for a fee of $14 by calling the Vermont Department of Health Laboratory at 1-800-660-9997. A water test kit order form is also available at the Health Department website: http://healthvermont.gov/enviro/ph_lab/water_test.aspx
Drinking water safety guidance for wells affected by flooding:
Until a test confirms that your water is safe, boil water for one minute before use in drinking, cooking, making juice or ice, washing fruits and vegetables and brushing teeth.
Shower with caution when on a boil-water notice. Avoid getting water in eyes, mouth and wounds. Do not allow children to swallow bath water if on a boil-water notice.
If there is a smell of petroleum or fuel, do not drink or use water at all for cooking, bathing or washing. Use bottled water or water from a known safe source. Call 1-800-439-8550 for consultation and testing information.
Residents who get their drinking water from a public system should look for boil water or other instructions put out by their own system.
For more information about drinking water safety after a flood, go to the Health Departments website anytime at www.healthvermont.gov or call the Health Departments drinking water program at 1-800-439-8550 (toll-free) during regular business hours.
Follow us on Twitter and join us on Facebook for up-to-date news, alerts and health information.
# # #
Load-Date: September 6, 2011



End of Document


VERMONT DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH OFFERS FREE DRINKING WATER TEST KITS
US State News
September 6, 2011 Tuesday 9:50 PM  EST

Copyright 2011 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 399 words
Body




BURLINGTON, Vt., Sept. 6 -- The Vermont Department of Health issued the following news release:
The Vermont Department of Health is offering free water test kits for residents with private drinking water wells that may have been contaminated with floodwaters.
"If your private drinking water well was covered with floodwater, is located very near a flooded area, or there is a change in quality - odor or taste - assume that it is contaminated, take all precautions and get it tested," said Health Commissioner Harry Chen, MD.
Contact your Health Department district office or town health officer for a free test kit and disinfection instructions. Water samples must be submitted to the Health Department Laboratory according to instructions in the kit, and must be clearly marked "contaminated by flooding". Be sure to write your name and address so that results will be mailed directly to you.
You can also order a test kit for a fee of $14 by calling the Vermont Department of Health Laboratory at 1-800-660-9997. A water test kit order form is also available at the Health Department website: http://healthvermont.gov/enviro/ph_lab/water_test.aspx
Drinking water safety guidance for wells affected by flooding:
* Until a test confirms that your water is safe, boil water for one minute before use in drinking, cooking, making juice or ice, washing fruits and vegetables and brushing teeth.
* Shower with caution when on a boil-water notice. Avoid getting water in eyes, mouth and wounds. Do not allow children to swallow bath water if on a boil-water notice.
* If there is a smell of petroleum or fuel, do not drink or use water at all for cooking, bathing or washing. Use bottled water or water from a known safe source. Call 1-800-439-8550 for consultation and testing information.
* Residents who get their drinking water from a public system should look for boil water or other instructions put out by their own system.
For more information about drinking water safety after a flood, go to the Health Department's website anytime at www.healthvermont.gov or call the Health Department's drinking water program at 1-800-439-8550 (toll-free) during regular business hours.
Follow us on Twitter and join us on Facebook for up-to-date news, alerts and health information. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com
Load-Date: September 7, 2011



End of Document


After the Flood -- Safe Drinking Water Advisory
Targeted News Service
September 6, 2011 Tuesday 6:07 AM  EST

Copyright 2011 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 384 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: BURLINGTON, Vt. 
Body




The Vermont Department of Health issued the following news release:
The Vermont Department of Health is offering free water test kits for residents with private drinking water wells that may have been contaminated with floodwaters.
"If your private drinking water well was covered with floodwater, is located very near a flooded area, or there is a change in quality - odor or taste - assume that it is contaminated, take all precautions and get it tested," said Health Commissioner Harry Chen, MD.
Contact your Health Department district office or town health officer for a free test kit and disinfection instructions. Water samples must be submitted to the Health Department Laboratory according to instructions in the kit, and must be clearly marked "contaminated by flooding". Be sure to write your name and address so that results will be mailed directly to you.
You can also order a test kit for a fee of $14 by calling the Vermont Department of Health Laboratory at 1-800-660-9997. A water test kit order form is also available at the Health Department website: http://healthvermont.gov/enviro/ph_lab/water_test.aspx
Drinking water safety guidance for wells affected by flooding:
* Until a test confirms that your water is safe, boil water for one minute before use in drinking, cooking, making juice or ice, washing fruits and vegetables and brushing teeth.
* Shower with caution when on a boil-water notice. Avoid getting water in eyes, mouth and wounds. Do not allow children to swallow bath water if on a boil-water notice.
* If there is a smell of petroleum or fuel, do not drink or use water at all for cooking, bathing or washing. Use bottled water or water from a known safe source. Call 1-800-439-8550 for consultation and testing information.
* Residents who get their drinking water from a public system should look for boil water or other instructions put out by their own system.
For more information about drinking water safety after a flood, go to the Health Department's website anytime at www.healthvermont.gov or call the Health Department's drinking water program at 1-800-439-8550 (toll-free) during regular business hours.
Follow us on Twitter and join us on Facebook for up-to-date news, alerts and health information.
Copyright Targeted News Services
TNS CT21CT-110907-3569534 61ChengTacorda
Load-Date: September 7, 2011



End of Document


Wildfires rip through sun-scorched Texas
CNN Wire
September 6, 2011 Tuesday 2:56 AM GMT

Copyright 2011 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved
Length: 746 words
Byline: CNN
Dateline: BASTROP, Texas (CNN) 
Body




BASTROP, Texas (CNN) --  Firefighters southeast of Austin, Texas, battled strong winds Monday as they struggled to gain ground against a fast-moving wildfire that has so far scorched some 25,000 acres and destroyed close to 500 homes.
Another fire in eastern Texas killed a mother and her 18-month-old child when flames engulfed their mobile home Sunday near Gladewater, the Gregg County Sheriff's Department said.
"We got a long way to go to get this thing contained," Gov. Rick Perry said about the fire raging near Austin. "I have seen a number of big fires in my life. This one is as mean looking as I've ever seen."
Dozens of fires are burning across the parched state, the Texas Forest Service said Monday.
Earlier, the governor issued a statement in which he called the wildfire situation in Texas "severe" and said that all state resources were being made available to protect lives and property.
"We will pick up the pieces. We always do," he told reporters.
Texas is battling its worst fire season in state history. A record 3.5 million acres -- an area roughly the size of Connecticut, Perry said -- have burned since the start of the season in November as hot and dry weather, coupled with a historic drought, made conditions ripe for rapid fire growth.
"It's a very serious, scary situation," said Jan Amen, a Texas Forest Service spokeswoman. "The drought has gone on so long -- it's just bone dry. Anything that catches fire takes off."
Over the weekend, officials said low relative humidity and strong winds from Lee, which made landfall as a tropical storm but then weakened, further fanned the flames.
A red flag warning was in effect for much of east, south and central Texas on Monday, with wind gusts of up to 35 mph in places, according to the National Weather Service.
A fire broke out about 45 miles north of Houston Monday afternoon. It was moving between 15 and 20 mph and threatening homes, said Rhonda Reinholz with the Magnolia Volunteer Fire Department.
Another fire burned in the Steiner Ranch subdivision in Travis County, forcing families out of their homes. Justin Allen evacuated from there with his five kids. Though he does not think the flames will reach their house, which is tucked near the back of the development, they are close enough to worry about, he said.
"It's pretty scary," said Allen. "And it's really sad for everyone that's in that path."
The outbreak of wildfires prompted Perry to return to Texas from South Carolina, where he was scheduled to participate in a forum for Republican presidential candidates.
The massive, uncontained fire in Bastrop County, near Austin, was the state's largest Monday. It destroyed 476 homes, according to Bastrop County Judge Ronnie McDonald, and threatened about 1,000 others, officials with the forest service's incident management team reported. About 5,000 residents evacuated as flames approached, officials said.
Lisa Ross learned she needed to leave her Bastrop home when her husband called 911 after realizing a looming fire had darkened the skies above.
"You learn what is valuable in life, and it isn't the stuff," she said. "It's people in your life, and what means something to you."
Cars crammed with belongings and pets packed a gas station on a highway near Austin, attorney Jonathon A. Zendeh Del said. "I've lived in Texas almost all my life, and I've never seen a fire that big in central Texas," he said.
Officials issued a boil water notice for parts of Bastrop Monday. Dark clouds of smoke billowing across the sky could be seen miles from the fire.
Satellite images Monday showed the fire stretching over about 25,000 acres, jumping the Colorado River and a highway, the Texas Forest Service said.
More evacuations are likely as the fire spreads, officials said. Already, hundreds of people are in shelters as dangerous flames keep them from finding out whether their homes survived.
"We have been told already from three people that live in that area that our house has been burnt. I had a gut feeling that it did not, but now it's looking worse and worse," said Gisele Vocal, an evacuee. "We just have to wait now."
Firefighters used Black Hawk helicopters to douse flames with a mixture of water and fire retardant Monday, officials said.
The fire forced parts of state highways 71 and 21 to shut and additional road closures were expected.
At least 63 new fires across Texas on Sunday burned nearly 33,000 acres, the state's fire service said. Fires were reported in at least 17 counties.
Notes



Update 10:55 p.m. -- Adds evacuee comment in grafs 12-13
Load-Date: September 6, 2011



End of Document


DPH Updates List of Public Water Systems Under Boil Water Advisory
Targeted News Service
September 6, 2011 Tuesday 10:40 PM  EST

Copyright 2011 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 777 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: HARTFORD, Conn. 
Body




The Connecticut Department of Public Health issued the following news release:
The Department of Public Health updated the list of public water systems under boil water advisory. Currently, 86 small public drinking water systems in the state are under a boil water advisory.
State health officials said it is important that residential customers served by systems that have issued a boil water advisory follow the guidance of their public water system. DPH is monitoring these systems and working to contact small public drinking water systems to determine their status and offer assistance as needed.
The following public drinking water systems are under a boil water advisory:
* Woodlawn Apartments, LLC, Ashford
* Mar-Lea Park Apts, Ashford
* Elmwood Court LLC, Bethel
* Sunset Apartments, Bolton
* 168 Boston Turnpike, Bolton
* Brooklyn Manor, Brooklyn
* Longview Estates, LLC, Canterbury
* Campbell Heights Apartments - System #2, Canterbury
* Chapco, Inc., Chester
* Aaron Manor Nursing & Rehab Center, Chester
* Denlar Apartments, Chester
* Goodrich Mobile Home Park, Clinton
* State Police Fleet Maintenance, Colchester
* Colchester Courtyards, Colchester
* Twin Hills Water District, Coventry
* East Haddam Elementary School, East Haddam
* Nathan Hale-Ray Middle School, East Haddam
* Chatham Apartments, East Hampton
* Lakeshore, LLC, East Hampton
* Lakeview Court, LLC, East Hampton
* Global Self Storage, East Hampton
* Theater Square, East Hampton
* Inncom International, East Lyme
* Hemlock Park Associates, Essex
* Whitby School, Greenwich
* Colonial Efficiency Apartments, Groton
* Rogers Mobile Home Park, Groton
* Whipples Mobile Home Park, Groton
* Quonnipaug Hills - Lower System, Guilford
* Quonnipaug Hills - Section I, Guilford
* Guilford Veterinary Hospital, Guilford
* Young Horizons Daycare, Haddam
* Hampton Elementary School, Hampton
* Abby Water LLC, Hebron
* Hebron Arms Apartments, Hebron
* Wellswood Estates Foundation, Inc., Hebron
* Cranberry Bog Apartments, Killingly
* Carefree Homeowners Association, Lebanon
* Ash Water Company, LLC, Ledyard
* Lisbon Mobile Homes, Lisbon
* Round Hill LLC - Well# 1, Lisbon
* Round Hill LLC - Well# 2, Lisbon
* 7 Orchard Park Industrial Area, Madison
* The Country School, Inc., Madison
* 1 Orchard Park Industrial Area, Madison
* 15 Orchard Park Industrial Area, Madison
* Orchard Park Ind. Area - 50 Mungertown, Madison
* St. Andrews Episcopal Church, Madison
* Woods Edge Apartments, LLC, Mansfield
* Carriage House Apartments, Mansfield
* Valley View, LLC, Mansfield
* Mansfield Village, LLC, Mansfield
* Uconn Agronomy Research Farm, Mansfield
* Community Childrens Center, Mansfield
* Reja - Rainbow Spring Water Company, Middlefield
* Lyman Orchards - Labor Camp, Middlefield
* Oakridge Gardens, LLC, Montville
* Oakridge Village, Montville
* Mountview Apartments, Montville
* Fox Laurel Mobile Home Park, LLC, Montville
* Stony Brook Mobile Home Park, Montville
* Thompson Hill Water Co - Beechwood Acres, Montville
* Candlewood Trails Association, New Milford
* SCWA, Cedar Ridge Division, North Stonington
* Stonington Institute - Main Building, North Stonington
* Chadwick Homeowners Assn., Inc., Old Lyme
* Region 18 Schools - Lyme Street, Old Lyme
* 144 Oxford Road, LLC, Oxford
* Westview Terrace Mobile Home Park, Plainfield
* Moosup Garden Apartments, Plainfield
* Jumbo Apartments, Plainfield
* Moosup Manor, Plainfield
* Salem Manor Condominiums, System #1, Salem
* Salem Manor Condominiums, System #2, Salem
* Eastview Kozley Water Association, Tolland
* Norwegian Woods Apartments, Tolland
* Meeting House Commons, Tolland
* U.S. Department of Agriculture - Tolland, Tolland
* Clinton Nurseries - Secondary System, Westbrook
* North Willington Village Condo Assoc., Willington
* Willington Ridge Condos - System #1, Willington
* Willington Ridge Condos - System #2, Willington
* Childrens Day School of Wilton, Wilton
* Woodbury Place Condominium Assn, Woodbury
* Brookwood Apartments - System #2, Woodstock
* Brookwood Apartments - System #1, Woodstock
The updated list of public water systems under a boil water advisory is also available online at www.ct.gov/dph/ (click on "Hurricane Irene: Important Health Information.")
Homeowners with private wells flooded or damaged by the storm should consider their wells contaminated and disinfect their wells before resuming their use. Information on private wells, as well as a list of laboratories certified to test drinking water, is available online at www.ct.gov/dph/ (click on "Hurricane Irene: Important Health Information.") DPH Environmental Health staff is also available to answer questions by calling (860) 509-7296.
Contact: William Gerrish, 860/509-7270
Copyright Targeted News Services
TNS m45 110907-3567866
Load-Date: September 7, 2011



End of Document


DPH Updates List of Public Water Systems under Boil Water Advisory
Targeted News Service
September 7, 2011 Wednesday 3:03 AM  EST

Copyright 2011 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 769 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: HARTFORD, Conn. 
Body




The Connecticut Department of Public Health issued the following news release:
The Department of Public Health updated the list of public water systems under boil water advisory. Currently, 84 small public drinking water systems in the state are under a boil water advisory.
State health officials said it is important that residential customers served by systems that have issued a boil water advisory follow the guidance of their public water system. DPH is monitoring these systems and working to contact small public drinking water systems to determine their status and offer assistance as needed.
The following public drinking water systems are under a boil water advisory:
* Woodlawn Apartments, LLC, Ashford
* Mar-Lea Park Apts, Ashford
* Elmwood Court LLC, Bethel
* Sunset Apartments, Bolton
* 168 Boston Turnpike, Bolton
* Brooklyn Manor, Brooklyn
* Longview Estates, LLC, Canterbury
* Campbell Heights Apartments - System #2, Canterbury
* Chapco, Inc., Chester
* Aaron Manor Nursing & Rehab Center, Chester
* Denlar Apartments, Chester
* Goodrich Mobile Home Park, Clinton
* State Police Fleet Maintenance, Colchester
* Colchester Courtyards, Colchester
* Twin Hills Water District, Coventry
* First Church of Christ Congregational, East Haddam
* Chatham Apartments, East Hampton
* Lakeshore, LLC, East Hampton
* Lakeview Court, LLC, East Hampton
* Global Self Storage, East Hampton
* Theater Square, East Hampton
* Inncom International, East Lyme
* Hemlock Park Associates, Essex
* Whitby School, Greenwich
* Colonial Efficiency Apartments, Groton
* Rogers Mobile Home Park, Groton
* Whipples Mobile Home Park, Groton
* Quonnipaug Hills - Lower System, Guilford
* Quonnipaug Hills - Section I, Guilford
* Guilford Veterinary Hospital, Guilford
* Young Horizons Daycare, Haddam
* Hampton Elementary School, Hampton
* Abby Water LLC, Hebron
* Hebron Arms Apartments, Hebron
* Wellswood Estates Foundation, Inc., Hebron
* Cranberry Bog Apartments, Killingly
* Carefree Homeowners Association, Lebanon
* Ash Water Company, LLC, Ledyard
* Lisbon Mobile Homes, Lisbon
* Round Hill LLC - Well# 1, Lisbon
* Round Hill LLC - Well# 2, Lisbon
* 7 Orchard Park Industrial Area, Madison
* The Country School, Inc., Madison
* 1 Orchard Park Industrial Area, Madison
* 15 Orchard Park Industrial Area, Madison
* Orchard Park Ind. Area - 50 Mungertown, Madison
* St. Andrews Episcopal Church, Madison
* Woods Edge Apartments, LLC, Mansfield
* Carriage House Apartments, Mansfield
* Mansfield Village, LLC, Mansfield
* Uconn Agronomy Research Farm, Mansfield
* Community Childrens Center, Mansfield
* Reja - Rainbow Spring Water Company, Middlefield
* Lyman Orchards - Labor Camp, Middlefield
* Oakridge Gardens, LLC, Montville
* Oakridge Village, Montville
* Fox Laurel Mobile Home Park, LLC, Montville
* Stony Brook Mobile Home Park, Montville
* Thompson Hill Water Co - Beechwood Acres, Montville
* Candlewood Trails Association, New Milford
* SCWA, Cedar Ridge Division, North Stonington
* Stonington Institute - Main Building, North Stonington
* Chadwick Homeowners Assn., Inc., Old Lyme
* Region 18 Schools - Lyme Street, Old Lyme
* 144 Oxford Road, LLC, Oxford
* Westview Terrace Mobile Home Park, Plainfield
* Moosup Garden Apartments, Plainfield
* Jumbo Apartments, Plainfield
* Moosup Manor, Plainfield
* Brookview Water Company, Ridgefield
* Salem Manor Condominiums, System #1, Salem
* Salem Manor Condominiums, System #2, Salem
* River Bend Campground-System #1:Office, Sterling
* Eastview Kozley Water Association, Tolland
* Norwegian Woods Apartments, Tolland
* Meeting House Commons, Tolland
* U.S. Department of Agriculture - Tolland, Tolland
* Clinton Nurseries - Secondary System, Westbrook
* North Willington Village Condo Assoc., Willington
* Willington Ridge Condos - System #1, Willington
* Willington Ridge Condos - System #2, Willington
* Childrens Day School of Wilton, Wilton
* Brookwood Apartments - System #2, Woodstock
* Brookwood Apartments - System #1, Woodstock
The updated list of public water systems under a boil water advisory is also available online at www.ct.gov/dph/ (click on "Hurricane Irene: Important Health Information.")
Homeowners with private wells flooded or damaged by the storm should consider their wells contaminated and disinfect their wells before resuming their use. Information on private wells, as well as a list of laboratories certified to test drinking water, is available online at www.ct.gov/dph/ (click on "Hurricane Irene: Important Health Information.") DPH Environmental Health staff is also available to answer questions by calling (860) 509-7296.
Contact: William Gerrish, 860/509-7270
Copyright Targeted News Services
TNS mv45 110908-3570806
Load-Date: September 8, 2011



End of Document


Water worries linger in Irene's wake for NC - Correction Appended
The Associated Press State & Local Wire
September 7, 2011 Wednesday 6:11 PM GMT

 Correction Appended
Copyright 2011 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 515 words
Byline: By TOM BREEN, Associated Press
Dateline: RALEIGH N.C.
Body




People along some of the tributaries and rivers affected most by Hurricane Irene don't have to be told there are lingering concerns about water quality; they can smell it.
"I would call it kind of a putrid odor," said Larry Baldwin, who patrols the Lower Neuse River by boat for the Neuse Riverkeeper Foundation, a private water-quality group. "It's kind of an acrid smell. It has a hint of hog waste, all kinds of things."
It's also probably coming from thousands of fish, crabs, shrimp and other creatures dying and washing up in waterways choked of their oxygen by an influx of organic material swept along by Irene. Along with fish die-offs, Irene also prompted boil-water advisories stretching from the Outer Banks to towns like Wilson and Tarboro, some 50 or 60 miles from the coast. About 17 advisories remained in place Wednesday, according to the state Department of Environment and Natural Resources.
"That's down from 32, so there has been a lot of progress," spokeswoman Sarah Young said.
Fish kills have been reported across the eastern portion of the state since the hurricane passed through, exacerbating what had already been a problem with levels of dissolved oxygen in the water, according to Susan Massengale, spokeswoman for the state Division of Water Quality.
"You already had low oxygen levels in the water because of the hot, dry summer we had, and Irene brought a lot of trees, leaves and swamp water," she said.
Fish generally need about four to five milligrams of oxygen per liter of water to survive, Massengale said, and in some rivers the oxygen levels are at zero milligrams per liter.
State officials and private experts like Baldwin have been warning people for days to stay away from both floodwater and water contaminating by runoff from Irene. The floods picked up everything from raw sewage to industrial chemicals and the resulting water could be full of harmful bacteria.
"The waters from Irene are carrying whatever they picked up from people's garages and workshops and things like that," Massengale said, as well as causing some waste water treatment systems to fail briefly.
More than 1,100 homes were damaged and six people were killed in North Carolina after Irene came ashore last Saturday at the southern end of the Outer Banks. It battered the state for hours, dumping rain and carving new breaches on Hatteras Island along the Outer Banks. So far, 33 counties have been approved for federal disaster relief. State officials estimate damage will exceed $400 million.
Some of the effects will be apparent only over weeks and months, like damage to field crops. Baldwin hopes that won't be true of rivers and streams in eastern North Carolina. There's a chance that the remnants of Tropical Storm Lee, which were still dumping rain on eastern counties Wednesday, would flush out many of the waterways affected by Irene, he said. In the meantime, though, people should be cautious.
"My recommendation is, if you're in an area with dead fish and the water doesn't feel right, like in some places where it feels filmy, then stay out of the water," Baldwin said.
Correction




In a Sept. 7 story about water quality concerns in the wake of Hurricane Irene, The Associated Press erroneously reported the location of a boil-water advisory. The advisory was issued for customers of a water system in Wilson County, not in the town of Wilson.
Correction-Date: September 8, 2011
Load-Date: September 8, 2011



End of Document


Pennsylvania American Water Launches H20 Program for Facebook, Twitter Fans
 
Manufacturing Close-Up
September 7, 2011 Wednesday

Copyright 2011 Close-Up Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Length: 424 words
Body




Pennsylvania American Water announced that it will donate one dollar to the Help to Others (H2O) Program for every new fan or follower on Facebook and Twitter.
In a release on Sept. 1, Pennsylvania American Water said the special campaign to generate financial support for the company's low-income assistance program runs from Sept. 1 to Oct. 15.
"This campaign is a great opportunity for stakeholders to start engaging with Pennsylvania American Water through social media, and at the same time, lend their support to low-income families who need help with their water bills," said Terry Maenza, Pennsylvania American Water director of communications and external affairs. "Twitter and Facebook enable us to connect directly with customers; that's why we're urging more people to join us."
To join, visit the company's social media sites at www.twitter.com/paamwater and            www.facebook.com/pennsylvaniaamwater. You can also view a brief video about this special campaign on YouTube, or by clicking            http://youtu.be/EnXQoBOvxQk. Donations will be limited to the first 2,000 people who sign up.
Pennsylvania American Water's Facebook and Twitter pages provide real-time information, as well as:
Water emergency and boil water advisories.
Updates on water and wastewater construction projects.
Information on customer programs, community events and environmental initiatives.
Conservation and watershed protection tips.
For almost 20 years, Pennsylvania American Water has been assisting low-income customers who qualify through its H2O Program. The program offers qualified recipients grants of up to $500 per year, a 65-percent discount on the monthly service fee, and water-saving devices and education.
In 2010, Pennsylvania American Water provided $327,000 in assistance grants to help customers pay their water bill. Grants are funded through a corporate match, customer contributions, employee donations and other fundraising activities. In 2010, Pennsylvania American Water increased its corporate match to $250,000 per year.
Pennsylvania American Water, a subsidiary of American Water, is a water utility in the state, providing water and/or wastewater services to approximately 2.2 million people. With headquarters in Voorhees, N.J., the company employs more than 7,000 professionals who provide drinking water, wastewater and other related services to approximately 15 million people in more than 30 states, as well as parts of Canada.
More information:
www.amwater.com.
www.amwater125.com
((Comments on this story may be sent to newsdesk@closeupmedia.com))
Load-Date: September 7, 2011



End of Document


Irene's gone, but water worries linger
Running Shorts (Greensboro News and Record)
September 7, 2011 Wednesday 4:45 PM EST

Copyright 2011 Newstex LLC
All Rights Reserved
Newstex Web Blogs
Copyright 2011 Running Shorts
Length: 64 words
Body




RALEIGH (AP) - Irene may be long gone, but the effects of the hurricane are still being felt in water quality fears all along the rivers of eastern North Carolina.
About 17 boil water advisories remained in effect Wednesday, stretching from the Outer Banks to Wilson. Thousands of dead fish have turned up in rivers and tributaries, killed by plunging oxygen levels in the water.
read more
Load-Date: September 7, 2011



End of Document


DPH Updates List of Public Water Systems under Boil Water Advisory
Targeted News Service
September 8, 2011 Thursday 4:24 AM  EST

Copyright 2011 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 615 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: HARTFORD, Conn. 
Body




The Connecticut Department of Public Health issued the following news release:
The Department of Public Health updated the list of public water systems under boil water advisory. Currently, 60 small public drinking water systems in the state are under a boil water advisory.
State health officials said it is important that residential customers served by systems that have issued a boil water advisory follow the guidance of their public water system. DPH is monitoring these systems and working to contact small public drinking water systems to determine their status and offer assistance as needed.
The following public drinking water systems are under a boil water advisory:
* Woodlawn Apartments, LLC, Ashford
* Mar-Lea Park Apts, Ashford
* Elmwood Court LLC, Bethel
* 168 Boston Turnpike, Bolton
* Brooklyn Manor, Brooklyn
* Longview Estates, LLC, Canterbury
* Campbell Heights Apartments - System #2, Canterbury
* Aaron Manor Nursing & Rehab Center, Chester
* Colchester Courtyards, Colchester
* First Church of Christ Congregational, East Haddam
* Chatham Apartments, East Hampton
* Lakeshore, LLC, East Hampton
* Lakeview Court, LLC, East Hampton
* Global Self Storage, East Hampton
* Theater Square, East Hampton
* Hemlock Park Associates, Essex
* Colonial Efficiency Apartments, Groton
* Rogers Mobile Home Park, Groton
* Whipples Mobile Home Park, Groton
* Quonnipaug Hills - Lower System, Guilford
* Quonnipaug Hills - Section I, Guilford
* Abby Water LLC, Hebron
* Hebron Arms Apartments, Hebron
* Wellswood Estates Foundation, Inc., Hebron
* Cranberry Bog Apartments, Killingly
* Ash Water Company, LLC, Ledyard
* Lisbon Mobile Homes, Lisbon
* Grove School - System #2, Madison
* The Country School, Inc., Madison
* Orchard Park Ind. Area - 50 Mungertown, Madison
* St. Andrews Episcopal Church, Madison
* Woods Edge Apartments, LLC, Mansfield
* Uconn Agronomy Research Farm, Mansfield
* Community Childrens Center, Mansfield
* Reja - Rainbow Spring Water Company, Middlefield
* Lyman Orchards - Labor Camp, Middlefield
* Oakridge Village, Montville
* Fox Laurel Mobile Home Park, LLC, Montville
* Stony Brook Mobile Home Park, Montville
* Candlewood Trails Association, New Milford
* Stonington Institute - Main Building, North Stonington
* Chadwick Homeowners Assn., Inc., Old Lyme
* Region 18 Schools - Lyme Street, Old Lyme
* 144 Oxford Road, LLC, Oxford
* Westview Terrace Mobile Home Park, Plainfield
* Moosup Garden Apartments, Plainfield
* Jumbo Apartments, Plainfield
* Moosup Manor, Plainfield
* Brookview Water Company, Ridgefield
* Salem Manor Condominiums, System #1, Salem
* Salem Town Center LLC, Salem
* River Bend Campground-System #2:Pavilion, Sterling
* River Bend Campground-System #1:Office, Sterling
* Meeting House Commons, Tolland
* U.S. Department of Agriculture - Tolland, Tolland
* Clinton Nurseries - Secondary System, Westbrook
* Walden Apartments, Willington
* North Willington Village Condo Assoc., Willington
* Childrens Day School of Wilton, Wilton
* Brookwood Apartments - System #2, Woodstock
The updated list of public water systems under a boil water advisory is also available online at www.ct.gov/dph/ (click on "Hurricane Irene: Important Health Information.")
Homeowners with private wells flooded or damaged by the storm should consider their wells contaminated and disinfect their wells before resuming their use. Information on private wells, as well as a list of laboratories certified to test drinking water, is available online at www.ct.gov/dph/ (click on "Hurricane Irene: Important Health Information.") DPH Environmental Health staff is also available to answer questions by calling (860) 509-7296.
Contact: William Gerrish, 860/509-7270
Copyright Targeted News Services
TNS mv45 110909-3573576
Load-Date: September 9, 2011



End of Document





Irene-NC Water
The Associated Press State & Local Wire
September 8, 2011 Thursday 6:52 PM GMT

Copyright 2011 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 43 words
Dateline: RALEIGH N.C.
Body




In a Sept. 7 story about water quality concerns in the wake of Hurricane Irene, The Associated Press erroneously reported the location of a boil-water advisory. The advisory was issued for customers of a water system in Wilson County, not in the town of Wilson.
Load-Date: September 9, 2011



End of Document


Wilson Not Included in Boil Water Advisory
Targeted News Service
September 8, 2011 Thursday 12:47 AM  EST

Copyright 2011 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 65 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: WILSON, N.C. 
Body




The city of Wilson issued the following news release:
Your water is safe and clean.
Several media reports mistakenly included Wilson in a list of communities having water troubles after Hurricane Irene. Again, this is not true.
Please rest assured that your City of Wilson water is safe and clean to drink and enjoy.
Copyright Targeted News Services
TNS C-paypan56- 110909-pp-3572324 71PayalPanda
Load-Date: September 9, 2011



End of Document


WILSON NOT INCLUDED IN BOIL WATER ADVISORY
US State News
September 8, 2011 Thursday 3:10 PM  EST

Copyright 2011 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 79 words
Body




WILSON, N.C., Sept. 8 -- The city of Wilson issued the following press release:
Your water is safe and clean.
Several media reports mistakenly included Wilson in a list of communities having water troubles after Hurricane Irene. Again, this is not true.
Please rest assured that your City of Wilson water is safe and clean to drink and enjoy. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com
Load-Date: September 9, 2011



End of Document


Binghamton Boil Water Advisory in Effect Because of Flooding [PHOTOS]
International Business Times News
September 9, 2011 Friday 2:17 PM EST

Copyright 2011 Newstex LLC
All Rights Reserved
Newstex Web Blogs
Copyright 2011 International Business Times News
Length: 424 words
Body




The Broome County Health Department has issued a boil water advisory for all Binghamton water customers as record flooding has left what the mayor calls a dire situation in the area.
This means that all residents must first boil all municipal drinking water before drinking it.
"This boil water notice applies to everyone served by the City of Binghamton water supply, including the Town of Binghamton and the Town of Dickinson water districts," a press release from the health department stated. "A drinking water standard was violated."
Officials routinely monitor the water for turbidity, also known as cloudiness, in order to determine if it is effectively being filtered.
The department stated that water samples taken on Sept. 8 showed turbidity levels of 14.1 turbidity units. 
"This is above the maximum allowable standard of 1.0 turbidity units," the department noted in its release. "Because of these high levels of turbidity, there is an increased chance that the water may contain disease-causing organisms."
Turbidity has no health effects, but it can interfere with disinfection and provides a medium for microbial growth, according to the department. Turbidity may indicate the presence of disease causing organisms, which include bacteria, viruses, and parasites that can cause symptoms such as nausea, cramps, diarrhea, and associated headaches.
Decades old flood walls were no match for the swelling waters of the Susquehanna River, which forced 20,000 people to seek higher ground as heavy rains from the aftermath of Tropical Storm Lee pushes already swollen rivers higher.
"The situation is dire," Binghamton Mayor Matt Ryan told The Associated Press. "It's the worst flooding in the history of Binghamton at least since the flood walls were built in the 1930s and '40s."
Tropical storm Lee formed off the Louisiana coast late last week and gained strength while it stayed in the Gulf of Mexico for days. The slow-moving system dumped more than a foot of rain in New Orleans before moving onto Mississippi and Alabama.
Lee's remnants dumped between 4 and 7 inches of rainfall, and up to 10 inches in isolated pockets along the northeast, according to The National Weather Service.
Flood warnings have been issued for Pennsylvania and New Jersey, and a flood watch is in effect for Eastern New York.
Heavy rains from Lee have swelled waterways from Maryland to New England, and have flooded highways and stretched the resources of emergency responders who are already dealing with cleanup efforts from a recent blow from Hurricane Irene.
Load-Date: September 9, 2011



End of Document


OUTAGE CALLED ‘UNPRECEDENTED’
The San Diego Union-Tribune
September 9, 2011 Friday

Copyright 2011 The San Diego Union-Tribune
Section: Main News; Pg. A-1
Length: 943 words
Byline: JEFF MCDONALD & CRAIG GUSTAFSON, U-T
Body




The whole of San Diego County and communities from San Clemente to northern Mexico were plunged into an electric black hole Thursday as the two major power lines serving the region failed suddenly.
The blackout occurred about 3:40 p.m., locking people inside elevators and robbing thousands of inland homes of desperately needed air conditioning on another in a parade of recent hot afternoons.
Thousands of shops and offices across the region closed abruptly after San Diego Gas & Electric executives announced that 1.4 million customers were affected and the blackout was likely to last through the night for most of them.
Colleges and universities canceled classes, the zoo closed, back-to-school nights were called off, flights out of Lindbergh Field were grounded and traffic backed up at blank or flashing red traffic lights across the region.
The outage was SDG&E’s worst since 1996, when 517,000 customers lost power for more than seven hours when two major 500,000-volt power links were knocked out days ahead of the Republican National Convention.
The cause of the power failure has yet to be determined although the Arizona Public Service utility company said the outage occurred after one of its employees performed a procedure on the North Gila-Hassayampa transmission line near Yuma.
Officials throughout the county said there was no indication that the event was caused by terrorism.
“We have reports of people stuck in elevators, but I’m sure we’re not the only ones,” said San Diego State University spokesman Jack Beresford. “Our police officers are very busy.”
Just after 8 p.m., education officials announced that Friday classes for schools throughout the county would be canceled.
Public officials stepped up patrols to prevent accidents and to deter crime. There were no reports of serious accidents or looting by late last night.
“If a police officer or a firefighter asks you to do something, please listen to their advice,” said San Diego Mayor Jerry Sanders, who is the city’s former police chief.
The widespread power loss apparently started in Arizona, where an employee for Arizona Power Service was working at the North Gila substation. The company said the outage should have been limited to the Yuma area and they were investigating why it spread so far.
SDG&E President Michael Niggli said the power grid is interconnected and reliant on neighboring transmission lines.
When the electricity went out in Arizona, he said, it triggered a cascade of outages that left the entire SDG&E service area in the dark.
Still, Niggli resisted pointing fingers. “All of our focus is on getting power restored,” he said. “We’ll deal with the cause later on.”
Repair crews scrambled to restore service as soon as the lights went out.
By 8 p.m., some customers in south Orange County had power restored. An hour after that, the lights returned to portions of South Bay, San Marcos and Oceanside.
Nonetheless, Niggli said a complete recovery was not likely until late today or even Saturday.
“We’ll have a few areas back by end of tonight, but it’s going to be a slow arc through all of tomorrow,” he said at an evening news conference.
Hospitals around the county were operating with backup power generators, and officials said patients were not in any danger.
At the UCSD hospitals in Hillcrest and La Jolla, full power was being delivered to emergency rooms, burn units and other critical areas such as operating rooms that were in use when the blackout occurred, said spokeswoman Kimberly Edwards.
“Everything is super calm,” she said. “We drill for everything from earthquakes and tsunamis to power outages and water loss.”
At the Tilted Kilt restaurant in Mission Valley, customers sat at the bar drinking beer, wishing for power to be restored. Many had showed up to watch the National Football League season opener.
Joe Narvaez, 41, said he was meeting a friend there to watch the game.
“I’m just kind of bummed out,” said Narvaez, a real estate broker from Orange County. “I’m thinking, more or less, about my family and hoping that they’re OK, because a lot of weird stuff happens during a blackout.”
Jackie Jones of Encinitas said she was watching a U.S. Open tennis match when the power went out at her home.
“I called my sister in La Jolla, hoping that she could give me the score,” Jones said. “That’s when I found out that it wasn’t just a local thing.”
She said she was preparing for a night without power, including getting cans ready to be opened for dinner.
“That’s unless my son gets back and brings some take-out,” she said.
Social media networks played a quick and critical role in helping blackout victims communicate.
With telephone land lines and cell service spotty, thousands of people turned to charged smartphones with email, Twitter and Facebook to make sure their friends and relatives knew they were safe.
“So enjoying the blackout right now. Everybody hanging out and walking around. Good times,” tweeted Peter Holslin of San Diego CityBeat about 6:45 p.m.
Local officials used the same communication tools to spread public service messages.
“Stay off the roads, text or tweet if you have to, and watch for a boil-water notification if your community is called for one,” tweeted Stephen Lew, an aide to Mayor Sanders.
SDG&E’s Niggli called the blackout unprecedented. A review of previous incidents shows many power outages, but none this serious. Eight years before the 1996 event, 314,000 SDG&E customers lost service, some for up to two days.
Staff writers Aaron Burgin, Matt Clark, Keith Darce, Pat Flynn, Michael Gardner, Robert Hawkins, Jen Lebron Kuhney, Maureen Magee, Nathan Max, Ashly McGlone and Karen Pearlman contributed to this report.
Graphic



 
3 PICS
Load-Date: October 19, 2011



End of Document


DPH Updates List of Public Water Systems under Boil Water Advisory
Targeted News Service
September 9, 2011 Friday 3:30 AM  EST

Copyright 2011 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 474 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: HARTFORD, Conn. 
Body




The Connecticut Department of Public Health issued the following news release:
The Department of Public Health updated the list of public water systems under boil water advisory. Currently, 38 small public drinking water systems in the state are under a boil water advisory.
State health officials said it is important that residential customers served by systems that have issued a boil water advisory follow the guidance of their public water system. DPH is monitoring these systems and working to contact small public drinking water systems to determine their status and offer assistance as needed.
The following public drinking water systems are under a boil water advisory:
* Mar-Lea Park Apts, Ashford
* Elmwood Court LLC, Bethel
* 168 Boston Turnpike, Bolton
* Brooklyn Manor, Brooklyn
* Campbell Heights Apartments - System #2, Canterbury
* Aaron Manor Nursing & Rehab Center, Chester
* Colchester Courtyards, Colchester
* First Church of Christ Congregational, East Haddam
* Hemlock Park Associates, Essex
* Colonial Efficiency Apartments, Groton
* Rogers Mobile Home Park, Groton
* Whipples Mobile Home Park, Groton
* Quonnipaug Hills - Lower System, Guilford
* Quonnipaug Hills - Section I, Guilford
* Abby Water LLC, Hebron
* Hebron Arms Apartments, Hebron
* Wellswood Estates Foundation, Inc., Hebron
* Cranberry Bog Apartments, Killingly
* Lisbon Mobile Homes, Lisbon
* Grove School - System #2, Madison
* The Country School, Inc., Madison
* Orchard Park Ind. Area - 50 Mungertown, Madison
* Woods Edge Apartments, LLC, Mansfield
* Uconn Agronomy Research Farm, Mansfield
* Lyman Orchards - Labor Camp, Middlefield
* Oakridge Village, Montville
* Stony Brook Mobile Home Park, Montville
* Stonington Institute - Main Building, North Stonington
* Chadwick Homeowners Assn., Inc., Old Lyme
* Region 18 Schools - Lyme Street, Old Lyme
* Moosup Garden Apartments, Plainfield
* Jumbo Apartments, Plainfield
* Brookview Water Company, Ridgefield
* Salem Manor Condominiums, System #1, Salem
* Salem Town Center LLC, Salem
* River Bend Campground-System #2:Pavilion, Sterling
* River Bend Campground-System #1:Office, Sterling
* Childrens Day School of Wilton, Wilton
The updated list of public water systems under a boil water advisory is also available online at www.ct.gov/dph/ (click on "Hurricane Irene: Important Health Information.")
Homeowners with private wells flooded or damaged by the storm should consider their wells contaminated and disinfect their wells before resuming their use. Information on private wells, as well as a list of laboratories certified to test drinking water, is available online at www.ct.gov/dph/ (click on "Hurricane Irene: Important Health Information.") DPH Environmental Health staff is also available to answer questions by calling (860) 509-7296.
Contact: William Gerrish, 860/509-7270
Copyright Targeted News Services
TNS mv45 110910-3575783
Load-Date: September 10, 2011



End of Document


Flood waters, mold could cause health problems
The Times-Tribune (Scranton, Pennsylvania)
September 9, 2011 Friday

Copyright 2011 The Times-Tribune
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 571 words
Byline: Erin L. Nissley, The Times-Tribune, Scranton, Pa.
Body




Sept. 09--Floodwaters may be receding, but the contaminants they carry and the mold they leave behind can continue to cause problems in the coming days and weeks, experts said Friday.
Around the region, 12 sewage treatment plants were affected by the floods, according to state Department of Environmental Protection spokeswoman Katy Gresh. Chief among DEP's concerns is raw sewage, microbes and chemicals from those facilities leaking into floodwater, she said.
Floodwater, rivers and streams contaminated with raw sewage can carry a number of dangerous microorganisms like E. coli and salmonella, said Kellogg Schwab, Ph.D., a professor of environmental health sciences at Johns Hopkins' Bloomberg School of Public Health. Highly contagious norovirus, a type of stomach flu, can also be carried through sewage-tainted water, he said.
The average healthy adult who comes into contact with contaminations will suffer a bout of gastrointestinal distress, including diarrhea, stomach pain and vomiting, Dr. Kellogg said.
But when the elderly and the very young are exposed, "it could be very serious and possibly fatal," Dr. Kellogg said. He recommended frequent hand washing and showering after coming into contact with floodwater.
Also possibly contaminating floodwater are toxins and chemicals from submerged industrial sites, according to state Department of Public Health officials.
To avoid getting sick, people should stay out of floodwater if at all possible, according to infectious disease expert Stephen Pancoast, M.D. If you are exposed to floodwater, avoid ingesting water and shower as soon as possible, using soap and a clean water source, experts said.
People with open wounds or scratches should cover the injury so it does not come into contact with floodwater to avoid infection, public health officials said.
Tap water that is cloudy or has an unusual odor should be boiled before being used. Pay attention to boil water advisories issued by municipalities, said state Department of Health spokeswoman Christine Conkright. Water should be heated to a rolling boil for at least one minute to make it safe to use.
And in addition to boiling water for drinking and cooking, boiled or bottled water should also be used to make ice and coffee and for washing dishes, mixing baby formula and brushing teeth, Ms. Conkright said.
Private wells that have been submerged by flooding should be tested prior to using well water for drinking or bathing, state officials said.
Everything that touched floodwater, including dishes and utensils, should be disinfected with a two-percent chlorine bleach solution, according to state officials. Use two or three capfuls of bleach per bucket of water. People should wear gloves and boots while using the bleach solution.
In addition to tainted water, the mold left behind can also cause health problems, experts said.
To avoid mold, standing water should be removed from buildings within 48 hours. People cleaning up mold or who will be in a building where mold is present should wear an N95 mask, available at most hardware and home supply stores.
Exposure to mold can trigger allergic reactions in some people, Dr. Pancoast said, and can cause upper respiratory illnesses, according to experts.
Contact the writer: enissley@timesshamrock.com
___ (c)2011 The Times-Tribune (Scranton, Pa.) Visit The Times-Tribune (Scranton, Pa.) at thetimes-tribune.com Distributed by MCT Information Services
Load-Date: September 10, 2011



End of Document


Public Warned of Health Threats from Floodwaters
PR Newswire
September 9, 2011 Friday 3:27 PM EST

Copyright 2011 PR Newswire Association LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 540 words
Dateline: HARRISBURG, Pa., Sept. 9, 2011 
Body




The state departments of Health (DOH) and Environmental Protection (DEP) today warned residents in central and eastern Pennsylvania of the health risks associated with coming into contact with floodwater.
A total of 159 water and sewage treatment plants have been affected, some to the point of overflow, causing sewage to leak into streams and rivers in some areas. In addition, floodwaters are carrying contaminants and debris from flooded homes and industrial sites.
"We have seen onlookers wading into floodwater to take photographs," said DEP Secretary Mike Krancer. "We cannot stress strongly enough that it is just not safe to be in contact with this water at this time."
Officials reminded residents the water has yet to crest in all areas. However, the state is working with local municipalities and regulators to immediately begin the process of rebuilding and recovery.
Residents should heed announcements from their local municipalities on the quality of drinking water, paying special attention to boil water advisories and requests for water conservation. Private wells that have been submersed by flooding should be tested prior to using the well water for drinking or bathing.
"Pennsylvanians' health and safety remains our top priority," said Department of Health Secretary Dr. Eli Avila. "We are working with local health care providers and facilities to ensure the public receives proper medical care in the affected areas and to get the word out on post-flooding health and safety guidelines."
In the event local water supplies become contaminated, or residents observe that tap water is cloudy and/or contains an unusual odor, they should:
Use alcohol-based, waterless hand sanitation products to clean their hands. Use bottled water for drinking water.Boil water by bringing it to a rolling boil and letting the water boil for at least one minute. Boiled or bottled water should be used for drinking, cooking, food preparation, dishwashing, making ice/coffee, mixing baby formula and brushing teeth.Wear gloves to protect open scratches or wounds from contacting contaminated floodwater. Raw sewage and other bacteria in floodwaters can cause infections. Wounds should be cleaned thoroughly with soap and clean water.Disinfect everything the water has touched with a two-percent chlorine bleach solution. Use two or three capfuls of chlorine bleach per each bucket of water. Wear gloves and boots when disinfecting.Discard food that has come in contact with floodwaters. Dishes and eating and cooking utensils should be thoroughly scrubbed with a solution made of clean water and chlorine bleach.
Common health threats after flooding include gastrointestinal (GI) disease and staph infections from contaminated waters.
To prevent mold, standing water should be removed from flooded buildings within 48 hours. If you plan to be inside the building for a while or you plan to clean up mold, you should buy a N95 mask at your local home supply store and wear it while in the building.
For more information, visit www.dep.state.pa.us or            www.health.state.pa.us.
Media contacts:
Christine Cronkright, DOH; 717-787-1783 (office) or 717-576-2341 (cell)
Katy Gresh, DEP; 412-298-7538 (cell)
SOURCE Pennsylvania Department of Health
http://www.prnewswire.com
Load-Date: September 10, 2011



End of Document


Agriculture Secretary Reminds Residents to Take Food Safety Precautions during Flooding, Power Outages
Targeted News Service
September 9, 2011 Friday 3:21 AM  EST

Copyright 2011 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 636 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: HARRISBURG, Pa. 
Body




The Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture issued the following news release:
Agriculture Secretary George Greig today encouraged farmers and residents affected by flooding or power outages to take precautionary food safety measures.
"Simple steps like monitoring the temperature and condition of food can make the difference between safe food and dangerous food," said Greig. "I encourage Pennsylvanians to follow basic food safety tips to ensure they remain safe." Greig offered the following tips to help families minimize the potential for foodborne illness due to power outages or flooding: During flooding:
* Drink only bottled water if flooding has occurred. Follow any boil-water advisories if issued by your local municipalities.
* Thoroughly wash all metal pans, ceramic dishes and utensils that come in contact with flood water with hot soapy water and sanitize by boiling these items in clean water, or by immersing them for 15 minutes in a solution of one teaspoon of chlorine bleach per quart of water.
* Products are safe to use if they have not come in contact with flood water.
If items have been submerged in floodwaters, discard:
* Foods that have been canned at home.
* All foods in cardboard boxes, paper, foil, cellophane or cloth.
* Meat, poultry, eggs or fish.
* Spices, seasonings, extracts, flour, sugar, grain, coffee, and other staples in canisters.
* Unopened jars with waxed cardboard seals, such as mayonnaise and salad dressing. Also, throw away preserves sealed with paraffin.
* Discard fruits and vegetables that have not been harvested from gardens and have been submerged in flood waters.
* Wooden cutting boards, plastic utensils, baby bottle nipples and pacifiers.
If items have been submerged in floodwaters, save: ? Commercially canned foods that came into contact with flood water and have been properly cleaned by: labeling cans with the name of food in permanent marker; removing labels; washing cans in water containing detergent; soaking cans for at least one minute in chlorine solution; rinsing in clean, cool water; placing on sides to dry (do not stack cans).
* Dishes and glassware if they are sanitized by boiling in clean water or by immersing them for 15 minutes in a solution of one teaspoon of chlorine bleach per quart of water.
* When in doubt, throw it out.
During power outages: ? Keep refrigerator and freezer doors closed as much as possible to maintain cold temperatures. Each time a door is opened, temperatures rise significantly.
* An unopened refrigerator will keep food safely cold for about four hours. A full freezer will hold the temperature for approximately 48 hours (24 hours if it is half full and the door remains closed).
* Food may be safely refrozen if it still contains ice crystals or is at 40 degrees or below.
* Never taste food to determine its safety.
* Use dry or block ice to keep refrigerators and freezers as cold as possible during prolonged power outages. Fifty pounds of dry ice should maintain an 18-cubic-foot, full freezer for two days.
* If the power has been out for several days, check the temperature of the freezer with an appliance thermometer or food thermometer. If the food still contains ice crystals or is at 40 degrees or below, the food is safe.
* If a thermometer has not been kept in the freezer, check each package of food to determine its safety. If the food still contains ice crystals, the food is safe.
* Discard refrigerated perishable food such as meat, poultry, fish, soft cheeses, milk, eggs, leftovers and deli items after four hours without power.
For more information about food safety, contact the Bureau of Food Safety and Laboratory Services at 717-787-4315 or visit www.agriculture.state.pa.us and search "food safety."
Contact: Samantha Elliott Krepps, 717/787-5085
Copyright Targeted News Services
TNS mv45 110913-3578357
Load-Date: September 18, 2011



End of Document


Agriculture Secretary Reminds Residents to Take Food Safety Precautions During Flooding, Power Outages
PR Newswire
September 9, 2011 Friday 2:33 PM EST

Copyright 2011 PR Newswire Association LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 617 words
Dateline: HARRISBURG, Pa., Sept. 9, 2011 
Body




Agriculture Secretary George Greig today encouraged farmers and residents affected by flooding or power outages to take precautionary food safety measures.
"Simple steps like monitoring the temperature and condition of food can make the difference between safe food and dangerous food," said Greig. "I encourage Pennsylvanians to follow basic food safety tips to ensure they remain safe."
Greig offered the following tips to help families minimize the potential for food-borne illness due to power outages or flooding:
During flooding:
Drink only bottled water if flooding has occurred. Follow any boil-water advisories if issued by your local municipalities. Thoroughly wash all metal pans, ceramic dishes and utensils that come in contact with flood water with hot soapy water and sanitize by boiling these items in clean water, or by immersing them for 15 minutes in a solution of one teaspoon of chlorine bleach per quart of water.Products are safe to use if they have not come in contact with flood water.
If items have been submerged in floodwaters, discard:
Foods that have been canned at home.All foods in cardboard boxes, paper, foil, cellophane or cloth. Meat, poultry, eggs or fish. Spices, seasonings, extracts, flour, sugar, grain, coffee, and other staples in canisters. Unopened jars with waxed cardboard seals, such as mayonnaise and salad dressing. Also, throw away preserves sealed with paraffin. Discard fruits and vegetables that have not been harvested from gardens and have been submerged in flood waters. Wooden cutting boards, plastic utensils, baby bottle nipples and pacifiers.
If items have been submerged in floodwaters, save:
Commercially canned foods that came into contact with flood water and have been properly cleaned by: labeling cans with the name of food in permanent marker; removing labels; washing cans in water containing detergent; soaking cans for at least one minute in chlorine solution; rinsing in clean, cool water; placing on sides to dry (do not stack cans).Dishes and glassware if they are sanitized by boiling in clean water or by immersing them for 15 minutes in a solution of one teaspoon of chlorine bleach per quart of water. When in doubt, throw it out.
During power outages:
Keep refrigerator and freezer doors closed as much as possible to maintain cold temperatures. Each time a door is opened, temperatures rise significantly.An unopened refrigerator will keep food safely cold for about four hours. A full freezer will hold the temperature for approximately 48 hours (24 hours if it is half full and the door remains closed). Food may be safely refrozen if it still contains ice crystals or is at 40 degrees or below. Never taste food to determine its safety.Use dry or block ice to keep refrigerators and freezers as cold as possible during prolonged power outages. Fifty pounds of dry ice should maintain an 18-cubic-foot, full freezer for two days. If the power has been out for several days, check the temperature of the freezer with an appliance thermometer or food thermometer. If the food still contains ice crystals or is at 40 degrees or below, the food is safe. If a thermometer has not been kept in the freezer, check each package of food to determine its safety. If the food still contains ice crystals, the food is safe. Discard refrigerated perishable food such as meat, poultry, fish, soft cheeses, milk, eggs, leftovers and deli items after four hours without power.
For more information about food safety, contact the Bureau of Food Safety and Laboratory Services at 717-787-4315 or visit www.agriculture.state.pa.us and search "food safety."
Media contact: Samantha Elliott Krepps, 717-787-5085
SOURCE Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture
http://www.prnewswire.com
Load-Date: September 10, 2011



End of Document


TALKING POINTS FOR FLOOD BRIEFING
US State News
September 9, 2011 Friday 3:47 PM  EST

Copyright 2011 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 721 words
Body




HARRISBURG, Pa., Sept. 9 -- Dauphin County issued the following news release:
Talking Points for Flood Briefing
9/9/11
3pm
Flood stage
Susquehanna River Harrisburg is currently at 23.57 ft (flood stage at 17.0ft) and expected to crest at 25.2 ft 1am (9/10/2011), according to the NWS. The river is now receding, but we expect a slight increase in the river level due runoff north of the county.
The Swatara Creek at Hershey crested at a record 26.8 ft. on Thursday afternoon and is currently at 22.15 ft. and falling. This is a promising sign.
Dauphin County Action
The Dauphin County-Emergency Operations Center (EOC) is open to support any activated municipal Emergency Operations Centers.
The County is developing water contingency plans.
Tanker Strike Teams will be on stand-by at various locations in the Southern end of the County in the event that fire hydrants are compromised.
The County is working closely with PEMA on a contingency plan for potable water supply.
Giant Food Stores will offer fresh drinking water for free to flood-ravaged residents. Please bring water containers with you.
Pickup locations are the following:
Union Deposit Rd., Lower Paxton Twp.
Jonestown Rd. in Colonial Commons in Lower Paxton Twp.
Linglestown Rd in Susquehanna Twp.
United Water issued a boil water advisory for all customers in Dauphin and Perry Counties. This DOES NOT include the City of Harrisburg, which the company does not serve. This was done in cooperation with the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
PA American Water customers are under a conservation water advisory.
There are currently no unmet needs requested by the local Emergency Management Coordinators.
Swift Water Rescue
Rescue Teams from Lawrence and Westmoreland Counties have performed at least 16 missions to rescue flood victims and are still here operating.
Open Shelters
The Red Cross of Susquehanna Valley has opened 2 shelters:
John Harris High School, Harrisburg;
Roland School, 1842 Derry St, Harrisburg.
If residents are displaced, please contact your local emergency management coordinator.
School Closures
All School Districts in Dauphin County are closed
Safety Recommendations
It is important for residents to continue to limit travel for their own safety and the ease of response and recovery efforts of the emergency responders.
Listen for news reports to learn whether the community's water supply is safe to drink.
Avoid floodwaters; water may be contaminated by oil, gasoline, or raw sewage. Water may also be electrically charged from underground or downed power lines.
Avoid moving water.
Be aware of areas where floodwaters have receded. Roads may have weakened and could collapse under the weight of a car.
Stay away from downed power lines, and report them to the power company.
* Return home only when authorities indicate it is safe.
Stay out of any building if it is surrounded by floodwaters.
Use extreme caution when entering buildings; there may be hidden damage, particularly in foundations.
Service damaged septic tanks, cesspools, pits, and leaching systems as soon as possible. Damaged sewage systems are serious health hazards.
Clean and disinfect everything that got wet. Mud left from floodwater can contain sewage and chemicals
USE COMMON SENSE
For Assistance
The Red Cross stands ready to assist residents with cleanup and shelter services. Residents can call 717-234-3101 for additional information.
Listen to your radio for information on assistance that may be provided by the state or federal government or other organizations.
If you hire cleanup or repair contractors, be sure they are qualified to do the job. Be wary of people who drive through neighborhoods offering help in cleaning up or repairing your home. Check references. Make sure the contractors are registered with the state and provide a contractor registration number.
Recovery Phase in Some Areas
Some areas in Dauphin County are beginning the recovery and debris-removal process.
Infrastructure
County-owned bridges will be inspected when the water level recedes, starting on Monday, by the county's engineer, HRG, to ensure structural integrity.
Harrisburg City is asking for volunteers to help with cleanup. To volunteer, call 255-3082. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com
Load-Date: September 11, 2011



End of Document


Talking Points for Flood Briefing
Targeted News Service
September 9, 2011 Friday 1:04 AM  EST

Copyright 2011 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 706 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: HARRISBURG, Pa. 
Body




Dauphin County issued the following news release:
Flood stage
Susquehanna River Harrisburg is currently at 23.57 ft (flood stage at 17.0ft) and expected to crest at 25.2 ft 1am (9/10/2011), according to the NWS. The river is now receding, but we expect a slight increase in the river level due runoff north of the county.
The Swatara Creek at Hershey crested at a record 26.8 ft. on Thursday afternoon and is currently at 22.15 ft. and falling. This is a promising sign.
Dauphin County Action
The Dauphin County-Emergency Operations Center (EOC) is open to support any activated municipal Emergency Operations Centers.
The County is developing water contingency plans.
Tanker Strike Teams will be on stand-by at various locations in the Southern end of the County in the event that fire hydrants are compromised.
The County is working closely with PEMA on a contingency plan for potable water supply.
Giant Food Stores will offer fresh drinking water for free to flood-ravaged residents. Please bring water containers with you.
Pickup locations are the following:
Union Deposit Rd., Lower Paxton Twp.
Jonestown Rd. in Colonial Commons in Lower Paxton Twp.
Linglestown Rd in Susquehanna Twp.
United Water issued a boil water advisory for all customers in Dauphin and Perry Counties. This DOES NOT include the City of Harrisburg, which the company does not serve. This was done in cooperation with the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
PA American Water customers are under a conservation water advisory.
There are currently no unmet needs requested by the local Emergency Management Coordinators.
Swift Water Rescue
Rescue Teams from Lawrence and Westmoreland Counties have performed at least 16 missions to rescue flood victims and are still here operating.
Open Shelters
The Red Cross of Susquehanna Valley has opened 2 shelters:
John Harris High School, Harrisburg;
Roland School, 1842 Derry St, Harrisburg.
If residents are displaced, please contact your local emergency management coordinator.
School Closures
All School Districts in Dauphin County are closed
Safety Recommendations
It is important for residents to continue to limit travel for their own safety and the ease of response and recovery efforts of the emergency responders.
Listen for news reports to learn whether the community's water supply is safe to drink.
Avoid floodwaters; water may be contaminated by oil, gasoline, or raw sewage. Water may also be electrically charged from underground or downed power lines.
Avoid moving water.
Be aware of areas where floodwaters have receded. Roads may have weakened and could collapse under the weight of a car.
Stay away from downed power lines, and report them to the power company.
*Return home only when authorities indicate it is safe.
Stay out of any building if it is surrounded by floodwaters.
Use extreme caution when entering buildings; there may be hidden damage, particularly in foundations.
Service damaged septic tanks, cesspools, pits, and leaching systems as soon as possible. Damaged sewage systems are serious health hazards.
Clean and disinfect everything that got wet. Mud left from floodwater can contain sewage and chemicals
USE COMMON SENSE
For Assistance
The Red Cross stands ready to assist residents with cleanup and shelter services. Residents can call 717-234-3101 for additional information.
Listen to your radio for information on assistance that may be provided by the state or federal government or other organizations.
If you hire cleanup or repair contractors, be sure they are qualified to do the job. Be wary of people who drive through neighborhoods offering help in cleaning up or repairing your home. Check references. Make sure the contractors are registered with the state and provide a contractor registration number.
Recovery Phase in Some Areas
Some areas in Dauphin County are beginning the recovery and debris-removal process.
Infrastructure
County-owned bridges will be inspected when the water level recedes, starting on Monday, by the county's engineer, HRG, to ensure structural integrity.
Harrisburg City is asking for volunteers to help with cleanup. To volunteer, call 255-3082.
Contact: webmaster@dauphinc.org
Copyright Targeted News Services
TNS C 71NayakRashmita 110914-MJ88-3579862 StaffFurigay
Load-Date: September 18, 2011



End of Document


Fall flood of 2011 leaves Binghamton shut down
Pipe Dream: SUNY at Binghamton
September 9, 2011 Friday

University Wire
Copyright 2011 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 921 words
Byline: Nate Fleming
Body




Low-lying parts of the Greater Binghamton Area - from a sewage treatment plant in Johnson City to Walmart in Vestal - were left underwater yesterday after the remnants of Tropical Storm Lee soaked a region where the soil was already saturated after a month of rain.
The 7.8 inches of rain Binghamton experienced on Wednesday - a record for Sept. 7, according to The Weather Channel - had nowhere to go but into creeks and rivers that were already swollen with water.
The Susquehanna River, which borders Downtown Binghamton along with the Chenango River, broke flood records set after a storm in June 2006. The Press & Sun-Bulletin reported that the Susquehanna crested in Binghamton at 25.7 feet at 8 p.m. yesterday, a half-foot higher than the previous high mark.
Binghamton residents described the 2011 flood as significantly more devastating than the proportional flood of June 2006.
"This is much worse," said Maria Berton of James Street.
Chris Mills, who said that his New Street home suffered total flood damage, agreed.
"Everyone said that 2006 was not like this," Mills said.
Binghamton Mayor Matt Ryan told The Associated Press that the flooding was the "worst in the history of Binghamton, at least since the flood walls were built in the 1930s and '40s."
ALBANY, WASHINGTON RESPOND
The flooding prompted a New York State government response yesterday morning and a federal response by yesterday night.
Gov. Andrew Cuomo declared a state of emergency.
He visited Broome County yesterday and performed a helicopter survey of the area. At a press conference, Cuomo told residents to obey evacuation orders and characterized the flood as one of "historical proportions."
"You heard the areas that need evacuations," Cuomo said. "If you are in an evacuation area, evacuate. As I said, it is going to get worse. It is going to get much higher. We have been through this before. By the time it looks that bad, you won't be able to leave. So leave and leave now."
The Associated Press reported that the New York National Guard deployed 300 soldiers to the Binghamton area. National Guard soldiers guarded bridges leading into Downtown Binghamton and used high-axle vehicles to ferry people and supplies through the city.
President Barack Obama signed an emergency declaration for New York at midnight, hours after his highly anticipated speech on employment to a joint session of Congress.
An accompanying Federal Emergency Management Agency press release stated that the agency was now authorized to act "to save lives and to protect property and public health and safety, and to lessen or avert the threat of catastrophe" in 15 counties in New York State, including Broome.
LOCAL OFFICIALS REACT
20,000 Broome County residents were evacuated as of yesterday evening, nearly one-tenth of the county's population of about 200,600.
County officials said at a press conference at 5 p.m. yesterday that the evacuation process was ending - barring search and rescue operations - and that they were crafting a plan to reintroduce residents to evacuated areas.
Brett Chellis, the emergency services director for Broome County, admitted that evacuees may be forced to wait days to reenter their homes.
"The reentry plan ... is being devised between our staff and the municipalities," Chellis said. "What this entails basically is to ensure the safety and well-being and security of the areas that have been evacuated and everybody that goes back into them."
Downtown Binghamton, as well as parts of Union, Johnson City, Endicott, Vestal and the entirety of the Town of Conklin, will remain under mandatory evacuation order until further notice.
Binghamton, Johnson City, Dickinson and Windsor remained under boil water advisories as of early Friday morning.
UNDERWATER NEIGHBORHOODS
Dozens of homes in Johnson City were inundated by flood waters, as was the Binghamton-Johnson City Joint Sewage Treatment Plant, according to multiple reports from the Press & Sun-Bulletin. The sewage treatment plant was forced to shut down.
Johnson City Mayor Dennis Hannon told the Press & Sun that "this is going to be a long recovery."
Neighborhoods bordering the Susquehanna on Binghamton's Southside were heavily flooded - Conklin Avenue was covered by at least five feet of water, while several houses on Rush Avenue were half-submerged beneath water that residents described as tainted by sewage.
Vince Innarella's home at 26 Rush Ave., where he had lived for 38 years, was flooded with three feet of water on the first floor. He said his house was fine through Wednesday night, until the water entered his home around noon yesterday.
"Once the [flood] walls broke, it came fast," Innarella said.
FLOODING ELSEWHERE
There have been no reported deaths in the Binghamton area due to Tropical Storm Lee, but at least 11 deaths have been blamed on the storm: four in central Pennsylvania, two in northern Virginia and one in Maryland, along with four others killed when the storm came ashore on the Gulf Coast last week.
100,000 people in total were evacuated from areas around the Susquehanna River. According to a report on The Weather Channel's website, Lee has dumped over 2.4 trillion gallons of water into the Susquehanna's watershed, causing the river's worst flooding in nearly 40 years.
Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Corbett warned of "a public health emergency because sewage treatment plants are underwater and no longer working."
"Flood water is toxic and polluted," he said. "If you don't have to be in it, keep out."
- Reporting was contributed by The Associated Press.
Load-Date: March 12, 2018



End of Document


Locals, travelers take refuge at Pine Grove Middle School
Republican & Herald (Pottsville, Pennsylvania)
September 9, 2011 Friday

Copyright 2011 Republican & Herald
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 801 words
Byline: Thomas Leskin, Republican & Herald, Pottsville, Pa.
Body




Sept. 09--PINE GROVE -- About 140 people took refuge in a shelter at the Pine Grove Area Middle School after rising waters engulfed the borough Wednesday night.
During the day Thursday, Superintendent Brian T. Uplinger said there were about 80 people still at the shelter.
"Some were more concerned with their property than staying safe," Uplinger said.
Mayor Kimberly Brown-Zerbe said that while some of the people went to the shelter on their own, the majority were rescued from their homes by rescue teams.
The mayor called out the Army National Guard about 8 p.m. Wednesday.
Some were also stranded in cars after attempting to drive through flooded roads.
"We had a lot of rescues," she said. "Many involved those that were rescued later becoming the rescuers themselves."
Sharon Zimmerman, North Tulpehocken Street, who was at the shelter Thursday, said she was rescued from her home about 3 a.m. Thursday, and although she wanted to stay in her home, the rescue team insisted she leave.
"I can't swim and I was petrified. Then they put this life preserver on me and I was soaked," she said. "It was an experience and I don't want to relive that too soon."
Although she wanted to return to her home Thursday, with no running water, she won't allow herself to until livable conditions are restored.
"I never had a problem like this," she said. "I'd get water, but not like this."
Brown-Zerbe attributed much of the help at the shelter to Sam and Wendy Primeau and Ang Readinger, who stayed throughout the night.
She said they originally came to help the local Red Cross and stayed even when the Red Cross left, since they wanted to transport all the evacuees to the shelter at Schuylkill Haven Area High School.
"If the (Schuylkill) Haven Red Cross refuses to come, we will get someone else such as the Harrisburg Red Cross," Brown-Zerbe said.
As of 6 p.m., she said the local Red Cross was sending its full force to the Pine Grove shelter.
In addition to the locals in the shelter, Brown-Zerbe said there were also people stranded on Interstate 81 that would be transported to the Pine Grove shelter Thursday night, some of which had spent the previous night in their cars.
They were waiting at Gooseberry Farms Travel Plaza, 490 Suedberg Road, near the interstate to be transported.
Brown-Zerbe said that throughout the night Thursday, the national guard, sheriff's department and the Pine Grove police would be doing door-to-door checks to determine if conditions were livable at homes, and if not, people would be evacuated.
If a person has minor damage on the first floor of their home, they may be allowed to stay, but if there is major damage, including no electricity, and if there are health issues, they will not be permitted to stay.
The agencies will also restrict access to the borough for the next 72 hours from 8 p.m. to 8:30 a.m.
A couple access points will still be available, but an ID must be shown to enter.
"The last thing we need is anybody running back and forth, and the less people going back and forth, the better," Brown-Zerbe said. "There are people everywhere, there are kids walking through town, and we're in the state of an emergency."
She said with the restricted access, it will help keep everyone safe and protect homes from looters.
According to Brown-Zerbe, the Red Cross will provide food, water and portable toilets, in addition to helping people make new living arrangements if their homes sustained major damage.
Portable toilets are located in south Pine Grove in front of borough hall, in north Pine Grove in the C&S Mini Market parking lot and at the high school Red Cross evacuation site.
She reminds residents that a boil water advisory is in effect in Pine Grove, there's a mandatory water restriction in effect, the water pumps are down and sewer system is non-operational.
No restaurants or businesses will be open in the borough until the water and sewer are restored, except pharmacies and grocery stores.
"We're not happy to be out here, but we appreciate what everyone is going through," said Rep. Mike Tobash, who was assisting at the high school Thursday. "We'll do our best to get what state resources are available in the area to help these local communities clean this stuff up."
Brown-Zerbe also said all of the rescues wouldn't have been possible without Michael Stalnecker, North End Fire Company fire chief, who coordinated operations Wednesday night while stranded in the loft of the fire department, and every water unit within the surroundings three counties assisting in the borough Thursday into Friday.
"Pine Grove is one of those places that pulls together in situations like this," Brown-Zerbe said.
___ (c)2011 the Republican & Herald (Pottsville, Pa.) Visit the Republican & Herald (Pottsville, Pa.) at republicanherald.com Distributed by MCT Information Services
Load-Date: September 9, 2011



End of Document


Outage prompts sewage spill, boil water advisory
The Associated Press State & Local Wire
September 9, 2011 Friday 7:59 PM GMT

Copyright 2011 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 130 words
Dateline: SAN DIEGO 
Body




The massive outage in San Diego County also cut power to water pumps, resulting in sewage spills and a boil water advisory for thousands of households.
Officials say about 2 million gallons of sewage spilled because some pump stations don't have backup power, leading to an overflow of sewage into waterways. The spills forced the closure of more than 10 miles of prime beaches. A second, smaller spill released raw sewage into San Diego Bay.
Lack of water pressure in high-elevation neighborhoods also raised concerns about contamination. Water officials are asking residents to boil water as a precaution until they complete water tests and all samples come back negative.
The beach closures prompted organizers to postpone the annual Dog Surf-A-Thon in Del Mar to later this month.
Load-Date: September 10, 2011



End of Document


Boil Water Advisory Update
Targeted News Service
September 9, 2011 Friday 9:48 PM  EST

Copyright 2011 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 181 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: BINGHAMTON, N.Y. 
Body




Broome County issued the following news release:
Boil Water Order for those who utilize municipal water (public) in Broome County as of 2:30 PM on 09/09/2011. Water Boil Orders will remain until notice is provided.
* NOTE THAT THE TOWN OF UNION IS NOT UNDER A BOIL WATER ADVISORY*
ALL City of Binghamton
ALL Town of Binghamton
ALL Town of Dickinson,
ALL Village of Johnson City and
Choconut Center
Town of Chenango (specifically the Front Street corridor & all side streets from Forest Hills Blvd. to the town hall)
These places in the Village of Endicott- specifically any houses in the West Corners area, Day Hollow Road, Betty St., Rodman Rd., Flora St., and Boswell Hill Rd. area that lost water ALL Village of Windsor
Bring tap water to a rolling boil, boil for one minute, and cool before using. Or use bottled water certified for sale by the New York State Department of Health. Boiled or bottled water should be used for drinking, making ice, washing dishes, brushing teeth, and preparing food until further notice.
Copyright Targeted News Services
TNS C-paypan56- 110910-pp-3574321 71PayalPanda
Load-Date: September 10, 2011



End of Document


Broome County: Filtration plants out, boil water
The Associated Press State & Local Wire
September 9, 2011 Friday 10:19 PM GMT

Copyright 2011 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 127 words
Dateline: BINGHAMTON N.Y.
Body




Officials say all three water filtration plants near Binghamton, N.Y., are down because of flooding and there's a boil water advisory in place throughout the county.
Broome County executive Patrick Brennan also says about 20,000 people still can't get to their homes as of late Friday afternoon and about 3,000 people are in shelters. He says local municipalities are developing plans for letting residents return.
While some have gone back home, others may not be able to for days or weeks.
State Sen. Thomas Libous (LIH'-buhs) says he expects residents in some of the hardest hit communities will be out of their homes for weeks or months, and some will lose them altogether.
Parts of routes 81 and 88 are still closed and some stretches won't be open until midweek.
Load-Date: September 10, 2011



End of Document


BRIEF: Filters installed, water tests ongoing
The Natchez Democrat (Mississippi)
September 10, 2011 Saturday

Copyright 2011 The Natchez Democrat
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 166 words
Byline: Julie Cooper, The Natchez Democrat, Miss.
Body




Sept. 10--FERRIDAY -- New filters at the Ferriday water plant are running smoothly, but a boil-water notice has not yet been lifted.
Mayor Glen McGlothin said inspectors did tests on the water Friday and will wait until early next week to lift the boil-water order.
"They just want to be cautious," McGlothin said. "They are brand new filters."
The filters, which were installed last weekend, are functioning properly, producing plenty of water, he said.
The new filters were ordered after the existing ones stopped functioning properly two weeks ago, leaving Ferriday residents with intermitted water outages for a full week.
McGlothin said he was hopeful the boil-order would be lifted by Tuesday.
The water is safe to bathe in, but should be boiled before drinking. Water buffalos are still stationed around town for those seeking clean water.
___ (c)2011 The Natchez Democrat (Natchez, Miss.) Visit The Natchez Democrat (Natchez, Miss.) at www.natchezdemocrat.com Distributed by MCT Information Services
Load-Date: September 10, 2011



End of Document


Floodwaters, mold could cause health problems
The Times-Tribune (Scranton, Pennsylvania)
September 10, 2011 Saturday

Copyright 2011 The Times-Tribune
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 570 words
Byline: Erin L. Nissley, The Times-Tribune, Scranton, Pa.
Body




Sept. 10--Floodwaters may be receding, but the contaminants they carry and the mold they leave behind can continue to cause problems in the coming days and weeks, experts said Friday.
Around the region, 12 sewage treatment plants were affected by the floods, according to state Department of Environmental Protection spokeswoman Katy Gresh. Chief among DEP's concerns is raw sewage, microbes and chemicals from those facilities leaking into floodwater, she said.
Floodwater, rivers and streams contaminated with raw sewage can carry a number of dangerous microorganisms like E. coli and salmonella, said Kellogg Schwab, Ph.D., a professor of environmental health sciences at Johns Hopkins' Bloomberg School of Public Health. Highly contagious norovirus, a type of stomach flu, also can be carried through sewage-tainted water, he said.
The average healthy adult who comes into contact with contaminations will suffer a bout of gastrointestinal distress, including diarrhea, stomach pain and vomiting, Dr. Kellogg said.
But when the elderly and the very young are exposed, "It could be very serious and possibly fatal," Dr. Kellogg said. He recommended frequent hand washing and showering after coming into contact with floodwater.
Also possibly contaminating floodwater are toxins and chemicals from submerged industrial sites, according to state Department of Public Health officials.
To avoid getting sick, people should stay out of floodwater if at all possible, according to infectious disease expert Stephen Pancoast, M.D. If you are exposed to floodwater, avoid ingesting water, and shower as soon as possible, using soap and a clean water source, experts said.
People with open wounds or scratches should cover the injury so it does not come into contact with floodwater to avoid infection, public health officials said.
Tap water that is cloudy or has an unusual odor should be boiled before being used. Pay attention to boil-water advisories issued by municipalities, said state Department of Health spokeswoman Christine Conkright. Water should be heated to a rolling boil for at least one minute to make it safe to use.
And in addition to boiling water for drinking and cooking, boiled or bottled water also should be used to make ice and coffee and for washing dishes, mixing baby formula and brushing teeth, Ms. Conkright said.
Private wells that have been submerged by flooding should be tested before using well water for drinking or bathing, state officials said.
Everything that touched floodwater, including dishes and utensils, should be disinfected with a 2 percent chlorine bleach solution, according to state officials. Use two or three capfuls of bleach per bucket of water. People should wear gloves and boots while using the bleach solution.
In addition to tainted water, the mold left behind can also cause health problems, experts said.
To avoid mold, standing water should be removed from buildings within 48 hours. People cleaning up mold or who will be in a building where mold is present should wear an N95 mask, available at most hardware and home supply stores.
Exposure to mold can trigger allergic reactions in some people, Dr. Pancoast said, and can cause upper respiratory illnesses, according to experts.
Contact the writer: enissley@timesshamrock.com
___ (c)2011 The Times-Tribune (Scranton, Pa.) Visit The Times-Tribune (Scranton, Pa.) at thetimes-tribune.com Distributed by MCT Information Services
Load-Date: September 11, 2011



End of Document


Susquehanna finally starting to recede
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 10, 2011 Saturday
CITY-C Edition

Copyright 2011 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; P-com News for PC Home Page; Pg. A01
Length: 840 words
Byline: By Mike Newall, Jeremy Roebuck, Angela Couloumbis, and Amy Worden
Inquirer Staff Writers
Body




WILKES-BARRE - The waters of the Susquehanna River are finally starting to recede. But the danger of further devastation from Tropical Storm Lee is far from over. 
That was the message late Friday from Gov. Corbett in Harrisburg and a band of exhausted engineers and emergency officials in northeastern Pennsylvania as they tensely watched and waited through the night to see if the 41-foot, $250 million levees would hold back the river's rising waters from this evacuated city. 
"This is not over," Corbett told reporters at 8 p.m. He said of the levees protecting Wilkes-Barre: "I am praying that they hold - we hope that they hold - we believe that they will hold. But I do not want to see what will happen if they fail." 
It had been a long day. After a temporary sense of relief in the early morning, officials realized by afternoon that damaged water gauges had given incorrect readings of the swollen Susquehanna, which had risen to 43 feet - about five feet higher than initially reported. 
The water pressure stressed levees protecting Wilkes-Barre to beyond what they were built to withstand, and left some towns harder-hit by Tropical Storm Lee than they were in 1972 by Hurricane Agnes. 
"We are at the extreme limits of the flood control system," said Jim Brozena, executive director of the Luzerne County Flood Protection Authority. "We are trying to save this valley. . . . Every hour is a benefit now." 
Paula Cecil, 44, cried at the sight of her redbrick home in nearby West Pittston. Agnes brought a foot and a half of water into Cecil's first floor, she recalled. This time, water lapped at her windows. "We're devastated," she said. 
Corbett put the statewide death toll at seven. Thousands remained in shelters or without power. The state Department of Transportation said more than 1,000 bridges remained closed in the eastern third of Pennsylvania, along with hundreds of highways. 
The bridges must be inspected before they reopen, a PennDot spokesman said. Though many roads in Luzerne County reopened Friday, officials urged people to stay off them. 
"This is a very significant event," said PennDot's Steve Chizmar. "I've been here 20 years and never seen flooding of this magnitude." 
Some of the 75,000 Wilkes-Barre-area residents forced from their homes Thursday as part of a three-day evacuation order returned Friday to inspect damage. Others climbed levee walls and bridges to snap photos of the raging river. 
National Guardsmen in humvees implored citizens to return to higher ground. Corbett, after touring the area, said, "People have to get themselves out of the way" to let engineers shore up a "levee system that's being tested to its all-time test." 
Keith Englehardt didn't heed the advice. After evacuating Thursday from West Pittston, he woke to blue sky and dry streets Friday, and decided to see what was left of his house. 
"I should just take a match to the whole thing, collect the insurance money, and drive out west to Vegas," he said. 
No breaches in the levees were reported by late Friday, Brozena said. But engineers had to stanch a floodgate where water was beginning to rush underneath and bubble up on the riverbank. 
The levees in Wilkes-Barre had been upgraded and raised from 36 feet - their height in 1972 - to 41 feet as part of a $250 million project between 2004 and 2006. 
Officials said the Wyoming Valley would not be out of danger until the river recedes to 28 feet, which they cautiously predicted could happen Saturday morning. 
Until then, though, the levees will remain under intense pressure and strain, said Col. Dave Anderson of the Army Corps of Engineers. 
About a quarter of West Pittston, home to about 5,000 people, was submerged, said Mayor Tony Denisco. He said about 175 homes received catastrophic damage. Only the rooftops showed in the borough's low-lying areas. 
A tank's cannon was all that poked out of the murky brown water at a flooded National Guard armory nearby. 
Many families said they had no flood insurance. 
"We rebuilt in '72, and we're wondering if we'll be able to do it again," said Bob White, escorting his mother, Carolyn, 69, who uses a wheelchair. 
While touring the area, U.S. Sens. Pat Toomey and Bob Casey pledged to work together to bring federal assistance. 
Meanwhile, in Harrisburg, Mayor Linda Thompson said her city was still in a state of emergency, with the Susquehanna expected to crest at just over 25 feet by early Saturday. That was better than an earlier 29-foot forecast. 
"We want people to know we are on top of this, and you are not alone," said Thompson, who hopped into a boat to inspect hard-hit areas south of the Capitol. Those areas have been evacuated and are under an 8 p.m. to 6 a.m. curfew. Two shelters are operating. 
With sewage plants flooded, thousands of central Pennsylvania residents were under boil-water advisories. 
See the extent of flooding in West Pittston and Exeter, Pa., in a video at www.philly.com/susquehanna 
Contact staff writer Mike Newall at 215-854-2759, mnewall@phillynews.com, or @MikeNewall on Twitter. 
Load-Date: September 10, 2011



End of Document


ISSUES IN BLACKOUT'S WAKE; Pump station failures send raw sewage to ocean, forcing beaches to be closed
The San Diego Union-Tribune
September 10, 2011 Saturday

Copyright 2011 The San Diego Union-Tribune
Section: Local; Pg. B-1
Length: 1032 words
Byline: MIKE LEE, U-T
Body




Thursday’s electrical outage did more than expose vulnerabilities in the region’s power system. It also highlighted the lack of backup power at some sewer and water pump stations across the county.
Boil-water orders were issued in several San Diego neighborhoods and more than 2 million gallons of sewage fouled the city’s coastline when key pieces of infrastructure failed.
From Fallbrook to the southern edge of San Diego, utility managers scrambled to cover weaknesses in a sprawling series of pumps and pipes that deliver clean water and remove waste water.
On the whole, officials said Friday that the systems performed well under unusual circumstances but that they need more emergency generators in case a major earthquake or other disaster causes another widespread power outage. There was no major damage reported to the water utilities, which were functioning normally in most places by Friday morning.
The questions about preparedness were most evident in San Diego, home to the largest and most complex water and sewer systems in the region. Pump stations serving 10 city neighborhoods lacked power on Thursday, prompting officials to issue boil-water orders to roughly 20,000 customers in those areas. The advisories are likely to continue into Sunday, even though the pumps were all working Friday. The delay is to accommodate required water-safety tests.
State officials said San Diego appears to be the only major Southern California utility where the boil precaution was necessary, but county leaders late Friday issued a list of small rural water systems forced to take similar measures. California health regulators said there’s no rule that requires backup generators at pump stations and said the city “restored the water system as efficiently and quickly as possible.”
San Diego also suffered the only two major sewage spills reported in the region — both at pump stations that don’t have on-site emergency generators.
An estimated 1.9 million gallons spilled into Los Peñasquitos Lagoon from a pump station on Roselle Street. About 120,000 gallons leaked into the Sweetwater River from a pump station near Interstate 5 and state Route 54. Beaches in both areas were closed Thursday, and they are expected to remain closed at least into today.
“For the thousands of miles of sewage lines and the many pump stations we have, to have only two major failures is pretty good,” said David Gibson, head of the San Diego Regional Water Quality Control Board, which regulates sewage discharges. “But to not have the backup capacity at those stations is a concern.”
San Diego runs about 75 small sewage pump stations and nine large ones. “Where it was financially and spatially feasible, we do have those backup diesel generators, and they functioned as well as we could have hoped,” said Christopher McKinney, deputy director of the city’s wastewater treatment and disposal program.
At both problem spots, he said, the pumps are connected to electricity coming from two power substations so they can keep operating if one line goes down. He said city officials assessed the possibility of putting on-site power at those locations a few years ago, but decided it was too costly and there wasn’t enough room for the machines.
“Their absence at facilities has always been a concern,” McKinney said.
Mark Weston, general manager at the Helix Water District in La Mesa, said sewage pump stations typically have on-site backup power because of how quickly wastewater can back up and cause problems.
He said utilities often rely on mobile generators for water pump stations because water stored in reservoirs often keeps lines pressurized in the short term. When water pressure drops too far, it allows for backflow into the system from homes and businesses and creates the potential for pathogens to enter the system. That’s when state officials advise water boiling.
On Thursday, Helix deployed 15 mobile generators that prevented disruptions to water deliveries across the district’s 25 pump stations.
But it was a close call, and Weston said it will prompt a review of in-house power production. “Had the event gone on for more than 24 hours, we would have needed more,” he said. “We will look at all the decisions we made and say, ‘Should we have more generation?’?”
The story was similar in Valley Center and in Fallbrook. “Because (power) came back on before the big demand came this morning, we didn’t have any problems keeping the lines full and keeping water for everyone,” said Jack Bebee, engineering manager for the Fallbrook Public Utility District. It borrowed generators from nearby Riverside County on Thursday.
For financially strapped water agencies, the choice can be difficult. Large generators can run into the millions of dollars, and not all stations have room for them.
“The reason we don’t have them at all our facilities is that it gets very expensive,” Bebee said.
Balancing money and risk is also on the docket in San Diego.
“It’s just not cost-effective to have backup generators for all 49 pump stations to prepare for a once-in-a-generation situation,” said city water department spokesman Arian Collins.
But he said Thursday’s emergency will prompt another look at the question once the water system is back to normal.
Rural boil water orders
County health officials on Friday issued a list of rural water systems where residents are supposed to boil their water as a precaution against pathogens.
The small public water systems lost pressure in during the power outage. The boil order will remain in effect until the distribution lines have been disinfected and samples confirm the absence of bacteria in the water supply.
Affected water providers are:
— 1000 Trails Oakzanita Springs, 11053 Hwy 79, Descanso
— Alpine Oaks Estates, 3505 Alpine Blvd., Alpine
— Butterfield Ranch, 14925 Great Southern Overland, Julian
— Calexico Lodge, 40248 Old Hwy 80, Boulevard
— El Monte County Park, 15805 El Monte Road, Lakeside
— H & J Water Company, 4835 Belvedere Dr., Julian
— Louis Stelzer County Park, 11470 Wildcat Canyon Road, Lakeside
— Mt. Empire RV Park, 29149 Hwy 94, Campo
— Oak Knoll Village, 31718 South Grade Road, Pauma Valley
mike.lee@uniontrib.com (619) 293-2034 • Twitter: @sdutlee
Graphic



 
1 PIC; 1 MAP; CAPTIONS: Boil water advisory. BETO ALVAREZ • U-T
Load-Date: September 15, 2011



End of Document


Susquehanna finally starting to recede
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 11, 2011 Sunday
BULLDOG Edition

Copyright 2011 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; P-com News for PC Home Page; Pg. D01
Length: 824 words
Byline: By Mike Newall, Jeremy Roebuck, Angela Couloumbis, and Amy Worden
Inquirer Staff Writers
Body




WILKES-BARRE - The waters of the Susquehanna River are finally starting to recede. But the danger of further devastation from Tropical Storm Lee is far from over.
 That was the message late Friday from Gov. Corbett in Harrisburg and a band of exhausted engineers and emergency officials in northeastern Pennsylvania as they tensely watched and waited through the night to see if the 41-foot, $250 million levees would hold back the river's rising waters from this evacuated city.
 "This is not over," Corbett told reporters at 8 p.m. He said of the levees protecting Wilkes-Barre: "I am praying that they hold - we hope that they hold - we believe that they will hold. But I do not want to see what will happen if they fail."
 It had been a long day. After a temporary sense of relief in the early morning, officials realized by afternoon that damaged water gauges had given incorrect readings of the swollen Susquehanna, which had risen to 43 feet - about five feet higher than initially reported. 
 The water pressure stressed levees protecting Wilkes-Barre to beyond what they were built to withstand, and left some towns harder-hit by Tropical Storm Lee than they were in 1972 by Hurricane Agnes.
 "We are at the extreme limits of the flood control system," said Jim Brozena, executive director of the Luzerne County Flood Protection Authority. "We are trying to save this valley. . . . Every hour is a benefit now."
 Paula Cecil, 44, cried at the sight of her redbrick home in nearby West Pittston. Agnes brought a foot and a half of water into Cecil's first floor, she recalled. This time, water lapped at her windows. "We're devastated," she said.
 Corbett put the statewide death toll at seven. Thousands remained in shelters or without power. The state Department of Transportation said more than 1,000 bridges remained closed in the eastern third of Pennsylvania, along with hundreds of highways. 
 The bridges must be inspected before they reopen, a PennDot spokesman said. Though many roads in Luzerne County reopened Friday, officials urged people to stay off them. 
 "This is a very significant event," said PennDot's Steve Chizmar. "I've been here 20 years and never seen flooding of this magnitude."
 Some of the 75,000 Wilkes-Barre-area residents forced from their homes Thursday as part of a three-day evacuation order returned Friday to inspect damage. Others climbed levee walls and bridges to snap photos of the raging river. 
 National Guardsmen in humvees implored citizens to return to higher ground. Corbett, after touring the area, said, "People have to get themselves out of the way" to let engineers shore up a "levee system that's being tested to its all-time test."
 Keith Englehardt didn't heed the advice. After evacuating Thursday from West Pittston, he woke to blue sky and dry streets Friday, and decided to see what was left of his house. 
 "I should just take a match to the whole thing, collect the insurance money, and drive out west to Vegas," he said.
 No breaches in the levees were reported by late Friday, Brozena said. But engineers had to stanch a floodgate where water was beginning to rush underneath and bubble up on the riverbank.
 The levees in Wilkes-Barre had been upgraded and raised from 36 feet - their height in 1972 - to 41 feet as part of a $250 million project between 2004 and 2006.
 Officials said the Wyoming Valley would not be out of danger until the river recedes to 28 feet, which they cautiously predicted could happen Saturday morning.
 Until then, though, the levees will remain under intense pressure and strain, said Col. Dave Anderson of the Army Corps of Engineers.
 About a quarter of West Pittston, home to about 5,000 people, was submerged, said Mayor Tony Denisco. He said about 175 homes received catastrophic damage. Only the rooftops showed in the borough's low-lying areas.
 A tank's cannon was all that poked out of the murky brown water at a flooded National Guard armory nearby.
 Many families said they had no flood insurance.
 "We rebuilt in '72, and we're wondering if we'll be able to do it again," said Bob White, escorting his mother, Carolyn, 69, who uses a wheelchair.
 While touring the area, U.S. Sens. Pat Toomey and Bob Casey pledged to work together to bring federal assistance. 
 Meanwhile, in Harrisburg, Mayor Linda Thompson said her city was still in a state of emergency, with the Susquehanna expected to crest at just over 25 feet by early Saturday. That was better than an earlier 29-foot forecast.
 "We want people to know we are on top of this, and you are not alone," said Thompson, who hopped into a boat to inspect hard-hit areas south of the Capitol. Those areas have been evacuated and are under an 8 p.m. to 6 a.m. curfew. Two shelters are operating. 
 With sewage plants flooded, thousands of central Pennsylvania residents were under boil-water advisories.
 Contact staff writer Mike Newall at 215-854-2759, mnewall@phillynews.com, or @MikeNewall on Twitter.
Graphic



 
AIMEE DILGER / Wilkes-Barre Times Leader
Load-Date: September 11, 2011



End of Document


DPH Updates List of Public Water Systems under Boil Water Advisory
Targeted News Service
September 12, 2011 Monday 5:00 AM  EST

Copyright 2011 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 375 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: HARTFORD, Conn. 
Body




The Connecticut Department of Public Health issued the following news release:
The Department of Public Health updated the list of public water systems under boil water advisory. Currently, 22 small public drinking water systems in the state are under a boil water advisory.
State health officials said it is important that residential customers served by systems that have issued a boil water advisory follow the guidance of their public water system. DPH is monitoring these systems and working to contact small public drinking water systems to determine their status and offer assistance as needed.
The following public drinking water systems are under a boil water advisory:
* Mar-Lea Park Apts, Ashford
* Elmwood Court LLC, Bethel
* First Church of Christ Congregational, East Haddam
* Colonial Efficiency Apartments, Groton
* Whipples Mobile Home Park, Groton
* Quonnipaug Hills - Lower System, Guilford
* Quonnipaug Hills - Section I, Guilford
* Wellswood Estates Foundation, Inc., Hebron
* Cranberry Bog Apartments, Killingly
* Grove School - System #2, Madison
* The Country School, Inc., Madison
* Orchard Park Ind. Area - 50 Mungertown, Madison
* Uconn Agronomy Research Farm, Mansfield
* Oakridge Village, Montville
* Stonington Institute - Main Building, North Stonington
* Chadwick Homeowners Assn., Inc., Old Lyme
* Region 18 Schools - Lyme Street, Old Lyme
* Moosup Garden Apartments, Plainfield
* Brookview Water Company, Ridgefield
* Salem Manor Condominiums, System #1, Salem
* Salem Town Center LLC, Salem
* Childrens Day School of Wilton, Wilton
The updated list of public water systems under a boil water advisory is also available online at www.ct.gov/dph/ (click on "Hurricane Irene: Important Health Information.")
Homeowners with private wells flooded or damaged by the storm should consider their wells contaminated and disinfect their wells before resuming their use. Information on private wells, as well as a list of laboratories certified to test drinking water, is available online at www.ct.gov/dph/ (click on "Hurricane Irene: Important Health Information.") DPH Environmental Health staff is also available to answer questions by calling (860) 509-7296.
Contact: William Gerrish, 860/509-7270
Copyright Targeted News Services
TNS mv45 110913-3578818
Load-Date: September 13, 2011



End of Document


BOIL-WATER ADVISORY LIFTED FOLLOWING TESTS
The San Diego Union-Tribune
September 12, 2011 Monday

Copyright 2011 The San Diego Union-Tribune
Section: Local; Pg. B-2
Length: 595 words
Body




A boil-water advisory for eight San Diego neighborhoods and several backcountry areas was lifted Sunday after tests revealed no contamination, officials said.
The results of two sets of tests from dozens of sampling sites in the city of San Diego showed that tap water in the affected areas is safe to drink.
The precautionary boil-water advisory was put into effect Thursday evening after the biggest power outage in the county’s history. When the blackout struck about 3:40 p.m., pump failure led to a loss of pressure in pipes, leading to the risk of contamination.
The city neighborhoods affected were Carmel Mountain Ranch, College Area/College Grove, La Jolla, North City/Flower, Otay Mesa, Rancho Bernardo, San Carlos, Scripps Ranch/Stonebridge and Tierrasanta.
Also Sunday, operators at the San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station reconnected the first of the plant’s two generating units to the Southern California grid, and operators were working to restart the second.
The twin reactors temporarily shut down after the blackout Thursday when sensors detected the grid abnormality. The shutdown posed no threat to workers or public safety, said facility spokesman Gil Alexander.
Kristina Davis • U-T
Fire in trash can ignites roof of house
Tierrasanta
San Diego firefighters quickly extinguished a house fire in Tierrasanta Sunday.
The incident began at 2:59 p.m. in the 4600 block of Seda Cove after a fire in a trash can ignited the roof of the house.
Two people living at the home escaped without injury. The cause of the fire is under investigation.
A spokeswoman for the San Diego Fire-Rescue Department said that there was $80,000 in property damage and a $10,000 loss to contents.
Karen Pearlman • U-TBlaze damages 2 units of apartment complex
Oceanside
A Sunday afternoon fire damaged two of four units in an apartment complex on Avenida Las Brisas, but no injuries were reported, Oceanside firefighters said.
The fire began at 3:10 p.m. near Mission Avenue and Old Grove Road. City officials declared the entire building uninhabitable because of damage to utility lines.
Four families — eight adults and one child — lived in the building. The fire was extinguished 45 minutes after the first firefighters arrived, said Peter Lawrence, an Oceanside Fire Department battalion chief.
Damage is estimated at $70,000. The Red Cross was to provide temporary accommodations for the families.
The cause of the fire has not been determined, but the investigation is focused on the area where the water heater was located in the carport below the damaged apartments. It appears that the fire started below the affected units and spread through the walls and ducts into the apartments and attic, Lawrence said.
Karen Pearlman • U-TFamily of woman found hanged seeks probe
Coronado
The family of Rebecca Zahau has launched a website seeking donations to help pay for further investigation into her death.
Zahau, 32, was found hanging naked with her hands and feet bound July 13 at the historic Spreckels Mansion in Coronado owned by Zahau’s boyfriend, Arizona pharmaceutical tycoon Jonah Shacknai. After a seven-week investigation, the death was determined to be a suicide, a ruling that angered Zahau’s family who believe that she would not have taken her own life.
On the site, JusticeforRebecca.org, the family accuses the Sheriff’s Department of ignoring the family’s objection to the ruling they refer to as “obvious injustice.”
Sheriff’s officials have dismissed the family’s request for additional investigation. The family has hired Seattle-based attorney Anne Bremner.
Debbi Baker • U-T
Load-Date: September 13, 2011



End of Document


Binghamton allowing residents to return home
The Associated Press State & Local Wire
September 12, 2011 Monday 5:38 PM GMT

Copyright 2011 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 584 words
Dateline: BINGHAMTON N.Y.
Body




Sections of this flood-ravaged city were reopened Monday to residents chased out by last week's record flooding, though some neighborhoods will remain closed because of safety concerns, officials said. Meanwhile, a vital Adirondack road closed by damage from Tropical Storm Irene was reopened.
The city was set Monday afternoon to release details of its plan for letting people back into flood-damaged areas, even though many residents have already returned home, Binghamton Deputy Mayor Andrew Block said. The areas still deemed off-limits are along the Susquehanna and Chenango rivers, including sections of the south side, downtown and the First Ward, he said.
The conditions of some structures are "just too dangerous," he said. "We're just not ready yet."
County and state office complexes in Binghamton reopened Monday. And classes resumed at most city schools and at Binghamton University, where U.S. Sen. Charles Schumer and Binghamton Mayor Matt Ryan met evacuees staying at a Red Cross shelter set up in the college's gymnasium.
The two rivers, which converge at Binghamton, overflowed their banks Thursday after 10 inches of rain from the remnants of tropical storm Lee inundated the region. Large sections of the city and nearby communities including Owego, Vestal and Conklin were covered in several feet of water.
The Susquehanna crested at a record 25.7 feet, almost 12 feet over flood stage. At midday Monday, the river stood at about 9 feet.
In Apalachin, in Tioga County just west of Binghamton, residents slogged through thick layers of mud as they returned home to check on their properties, many of which are likely to be condemned, officials said.
"All these houses are destroyed. They're gone," village resident Carlena Hoover, a 30-year-old mother of two boys, told the Press and Sun-Bulletin of Binghamton.
"Everything in my house is pretty much garbage," John Prosinski, 41, told the newspaper. "I'd rather not come back, but my daughter is in first grade. She loves her school."
Bonnie Fiorelli, 53, also faced the total loss of her home. She has lived in Apalachin for three decades and stayed in her home during the 2006 flood. Last week, firefighters evacuated her by boat.
"I've seen people come back and rebuild their lives," said Fiorelli as she broke down in tears. "These were their homes, and they're ruined."
Many schools resumed classes, but others, including the Owego-Apalachin and Vestal districts, remained closed for another day. Most Binghamton city school reopened Monday.
Boil-water advisories remained in effect in many areas, including the city of Binghamton.
Some 20,000 residents of Binghamton and surrounding Broome County evacuated to escape the flooding, officials said. Officials had no estimate on the number still forced to stay away from their homes Monday, Block said.
In the Adirondacks, Gov. Andrew Cuomo joined state and local officials to announce the reopening of Route 73, a key road into the North Country's interior. The road connects the Lake Placid region with the northern stretch of Interstate 87 known as the Adirondack Northway.
Sections of the two-lane road were washed out by Irene's torrential rains in late August. Cuomo said on Labor Day it would be 20 days before the road was fully open. But the work was finished ahead of schedule and it reopened Monday afternoon.
"Route 73 is a vital highway connecting residents and businesses in the North Country and today's reopening is an important step in our recovery from Hurricane Irene," Cuomo said.
Load-Date: September 13, 2011



End of Document


Flood Cleanup Draws Lots Of Support - Correction Appended
Intelligencer Journal/New Era (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
September 12, 2011 Monday

 Correction Appended
Copyright 2011 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: A; Pg. 5
Length: 760 words
Byline: Bernard Harris
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body




Staff Writer
On the post outside the door to McCleary's Public House, owner Freddie States had marked how high he expected the water to rise.
Above that mark were those made by others, almost to the top of the post.
Fortunately for States and the other property owners along Front Street in Marietta, the mark made in mud lower on the post was the actual high water mark on Thursday.
Forecasters were calling for 7 feet of water inside the restaurant's first floor. States said the water rose 2 feet.
"It's still a lot of damage. It will be half the drywall instead of all the drywall," said States, who has owned the business for five years.
Yet States and others in Marietta were seeing the bright side of the flooding that began Wednesday and began receding early Friday.
Late Sunday afternoon, he sat on the porch of his business, with dehumidifiers humming inside. In his hand was a plate of lasagna delivered by friends. Before him was a pile of water-logged debris hauled from the 130 Front St. restaurant and rental properties on either side. The day began with a half-inch of river mud on everything. It was ending with pumped-out water and a street and sidewalk that had been power-washed three times.
About 40 people came to help clean the restaurant, States said.
Amanda Hiestand was just down the street flipping burgers and grilling hot dogs. Along with Danielle Brown, she was offering them to whoever was around.
Hiestand's grill was one of four that members of County Bible Church had set up along Front Street.
"It's been overwhelming, not only for us, but for residents," Angie Shearer, spokeswoman for Marietta's Pioneer Fire Company, said of donations of food. "It's really kept us going."
Marietta firefighters have been assisted through the flooding by fire companies from as far away as New Holland, Blue Ball and Lebanon County, and by sheriff's deputies and Civil Air Patrol volunteers, she said.
Beginning today, the Pioneer Fire Company will be providing community meals - breakfast, lunch and dinner - for Marietta residents cleaning up from the flooding.
The American Red Cross fed about 40 people lunch on Sunday at the disaster shelter at Marietta's Donegal Middle School, mostly with the help of community volunteers, said Christine Skiles, the Red Cross shelter manager. The shelter was opened there Wednesday.
The Red Cross on Sunday packed up the shelter and moved it to the Brightside Opportunities Center, on Hershey Avenue in Lancaster city. There they expected to provide shelter to residents of Almanac Avenue who were dislocated by the rising Conestoga River.
On Sunday, Pioneer firefighters in Marietta were using a truck to pump water from flooded basements and a water cannon to shoot it over the railroad tracks along Front Street toward the Susquehanna River. They had been doing so since the water began to recede.
The river dropped below 49 feet - the official flood stage for Marietta - at about 5:15 p.m. Sunday. It had reached 58.16 feet exactly 24 hours earlier.
Elsewhere in the county, life began to return to normal.
David Lewis, of the Columbia Water Co., announced Sunday evening that a boil-water advisory had been lifted for Columbia and Mountville boroughs and West Hempfield and Manor townships.
Students were expected to return to classes today, including those in Elizabethtown, which received as much as 15 inches of rain last week.
And state transportation officials said Sunday night that only nine roads in Lancaster County remained closed, down from the hundreds that were blocked at the height of the storm Thursday morning.
The roads that remained closed are:
nRoute 322 between Pumping Station Road and Route 501/Furnace Hills Pike in Elizabeth Township.
nRoute 324/Pequea Boulevard between Duck Hill Road and Fox Hollow Road in Conestoga Township.
nRoute 441/River Road between Cardinal Drive/Klinesville Road and Old Chickies Hill Road in West Hempfield Township.
nRoute 897 between Buena Vista Road and Route 340/Old Philadelphia Pike in Salisbury Township.
nRoute 897/Main Street between Texter Mountain Road and Peartown Road in West Cocalico Township.
nLincoln Road between Clay Road in Warwick Township and Carpenter Road in Clay Township.
nHunsicker Road between Route 23/New Holland Pike in Upper Leacock Township and Butter Road in Manheim Township.
nKinderhook Road/Longenecker Road along Little Chickies Creek between Pinkerton Road in Rapho Township and Route 230/Main Street in Mount Joy Township.
nMount Pleasant Road between Risser Mill Road in Mount Joy Township and Milton Grove Road in Rapho Township.
Correction




A story about the flood cleanup in Monday's Intelligencer Journal/Lancaster New Era incorrectly stated the name of Community Bible Church.
Also, an incorrect time was listed for the cresting of the Susquehanna River. The river crested in Marietta on Friday about 6:30 a.m.
Correction-Date: September 14, 2011
Graphic



 
Staff Members Of Community Bible Church, From Left, Danielle Brown, Amanda Hiestand And Chris Hiestand, Make Hamburgers And Hot Dogs Sunday For The Residents And Volunteers Cleaning Up Front Street In Marietta. Vinny Tennis
Load-Date: September 12, 2011



End of Document


UPDATED BOIL WATER ADVISORIES FOR SEPT. 12
US State News
September 12, 2011 Monday 6:59 AM  EST

Copyright 2011 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 135 words
Body




BINGHAMTON, N.Y., Sept. 12 -- Broome County issued the following press release:
Customers of the above mentioned water systems are being notified on Monday, Sept. 12, 2011 at 12:30 PM that the Boil Water Order is no longer in effect. The criteria for lifting the Boil Water Order has been met and consumers of these water systems can resume using the water for all purposes.
The following contacts are available if you have any questions concerning your water supply:
* City of Binghamton, Joe Yannuzzi at 343-9636.
* Town of Binghamton at 772-0357.
* Town of Dickinson, Dan Miller at 343-3431.
* Village of Johnson City at 798-9803 x234.
* Broome County Health Department at 778-2887. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com
Load-Date: September 12, 2011



End of Document


Pa. reports thousands of flood-damaged buildings
The Associated Press State & Local Wire
September 13, 2011 Tuesday 10:55 PM GMT

Copyright 2011 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 772 words
Byline: By MICHAEL RUBINKAM and PETER JACKSON, Associated Press
Dateline: ALLENTOWN Pa.
Body




The enormity of the devastation caused by last week's record flooding began to emerge as President Barack Obama issued a disaster declaration for 19 Pennsylvania counties and state officials on Tuesday released a very preliminary estimate of more than 4,500 homes destroyed or damaged a number sure to rise significantly as more damage reports come in.
The disaster declaration frees up federal aid to individuals and businesses, including cash grants for temporary housing and home repairs as well as low-interest loans to cover uninsured property losses. It also makes federal funds available for hazard mitigation.
Megan Kanyuck, 26, of hard-hit Mocanaqua in Luzerne County, lost nearly everything when her apartment was deluged by several feet of Susquehanna River water.
The supermarket bakery worker, who has a 2-month-old daughter and not much money to start over, said she plans to apply for federal disaster assistance to help get her back on her feet.
"I'm praying to God I get at least a little bit so I can find another place to live," she said.
Vice President Joe Biden planned to travel to northeastern Pennsylvania on Friday to survey storm damage, the White House announced.
At least 4,542 homes and businesses in the counties covered by Tuesday's declaration were damaged to some extent by flooding caused by remnants of Tropical Storm Lee, including more than 2,000 that were destroyed or sustained major damage, according to Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency spokesman Cory Angell.
But many counties and municipalities only performed a superficial assessment or concentrated on a few hard-hit areas as they worked quickly to meet minimum federal criteria for inclusion on the disaster list.
In Dauphin County alone, for example, a more complete tally revealed the storm destroyed or caused major damage to nearly 1,400 homes, businesses and apartment buildings and damage teams have yet to survey more than half the county's municipalities, said Scott Burford, the county's deputy chief clerk and emergency management agency spokesman. He estimated "north of $93 million" in damage to private property so far.
In Columbia County, where the Susquehanna crested at 32.75 feet at Bloomsburg, breaking a record set in 1904, officials reported 1,000 buildings with damage.
"That very well could be 2,000 by the time all this gets put together," said John Thomas, spokesman for the county's emergency management agency.
Lee, he added, "is going to be the measuring stick for a long while."
Wyoming County reported major and minor damage to 3,200 structures.
"We're banged up here pretty good," said Gene Dziak, the county's emergency management coordinator.
Teams are assessing damage in Philadelphia, Chester, Bucks, Montgomery and Northampton counties to determine whether they also should qualify for federal disaster assistance.
Beyond the devastation of private property, extensive flooding also damaged hundreds of roads, bridges, public buildings and water and sewer treatment plants in Pennsylvania. More than 140 state roads remained closed Tuesday, while seven sewer-treatment plants were out of service and 15 water-treatment plants issued boil-water advisories, either because they were totally offline or were having trouble producing potable water.
State Agriculture Secretary George Greig toured several farms and said the storm caused widespread crop damage.
Gary Rinehimer, 58, of Plymouth Township a devastated riverfront community just downstream from Wilkes-Barre's levee system said the sidewalks there were filled with mounds of trash and ruined furniture that have yet to be picked up, even though the Susquehanna receded days ago.
Rinehimer, whose home and auto restoration business sustained major damage, said the stench was becoming unbearable.
"What are they waiting for? Who's in charge to get this garbage off the streets? ... This is becoming a health risk," he said.
Leaders of the 157-year-old Bloomsburg Fair, meanwhile, might cancel the event for the first time in its history because the fairgrounds were inundated with 10 to 12 feet of water, the Press-Enterprise of Bloomsburg reported.
In Luzerne County, a dozen people were charged with the looting of evacuated homes. In one case, a woman stole a big-screen television, a computer and various other items from a neighbor whose home she'd agreed to watch, police said. In another, two men allegedly stole a shotgun, two rifles, watches, computers and tools.
District Attorney Jackie Musto Carroll called the burglaries "despicable."
At least 11 people were killed in last week's floods, according to state officials.
Jackson reported from Harrisburg.
Load-Date: September 14, 2011



End of Document


Pine Grove area hit hard by flood waters
Republican & Herald (Pottsville, Pennsylvania)
September 13, 2011 Tuesday

Copyright 2011 Republican & Herald
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 954 words
Byline: Amy Marchiano, Republican & Herald, Pottsville, Pa.
Body




Sept. 13--PINE GROVE -- Ed Minnich stood in the front yard of his Laurel Street home Monday wearing clothes that once belonged to someone else.
The 78-year-old resident didn't have many belongings left following flooding as a result of rain brought by Hurricane Irene and then Tropical Storm Lee.
Minnich is staying with his daughter, Christine Zimmerman, 50, of Pine Grove. One night he even slept in a shelter set up at the Pine Grove Area High School, which has since been closed.
"Nothing was insured inside the house. We had to throw everything out," Zimmerman said.
" '72 was bad but not this bad," he said, referring to the devastation brought by Hurricane Agnes in 1972. He was speaking to local officials, including state Sen. David Argall, R-29; borough council President Kenneth Leh-man; Robert Wolfe, borough emergency management coordinator and others who participated in a walking tour Monday to assess damage after meeting in borough hall.
They saw a red oil tank on nearby grass, prompting Lehman to remark there are a lot of such tanks laying or floating around in the borough. An odor of oil permeated Laurel Street.
On Minnich's lawn, family pictures were drying on top of cardboard. A water line, about 6 feet high on Minnich's front lawn. A water line on the vinyl siding of Minnich's home showed the water level had been more than 6 feet high. A large hole was visible in the home's foundation.
Minnich's home, as well as homes at 45 and 50 Laurel St., were condemned, according to Christopher Madara, borough code officer. Madara is an employee of Alfred Benesch & Co., Pottsville.
According to Pine Grove Fire Chief David Sattizahn, "Seventy-five percent of the borough had water damage."
Mayor Kimberly Brown Zerbe said three homes had been condemned as of Monday. Asked about a damage estimate, she said, "At this point we can't even guess. It's going to be big."
A representative of the Federal Emergency Management Agency toured Pine Grove on Sunday, Sattizahn said, adding that as a result, it was determined that "164 homes (in the borough and in Pine Grove Township) had major damage and 37 of those houses were destroyed" as per FEMA guidelines.
According to a press release from the Schuylkill County Emergency Management Agency, information has been submitted to include the county for "individual assistance" in a presidential disaster declaration.
State Rep. Mike Tobash, R-125, who met with the other officials at borough hall, said he hopes that the assistance is "issued within the next couple of days."
Applications, he said, can be accepted once the designation is given, adding, "Obviously, people are going through a lot."
Tobash said he has extended hours at his Pine Grove satellite office to aid those impacted by the flood. Located in the American Legion home, 42 S. Tulpehocken St., the office has instituted the following hours: Noon to 5 p.m. today, noon to 4 p.m. Wednesday and 1:30 to 5 p.m. Thursday.
Neighbors, meanwhile, did their best to clean up after the storm that dumped more than 15 inches of rain in Pine Grove and differing amount in other areas, leaving scores homeless and causing serious property damage.
The shelter established last week at the Pine Grove Area High School closed Monday because there were no more people seeking refuge, Tim Firestone, Red Cross emergency services director, said. About 120 sought shelter at the school, he added.
Brown Zerbe, who said many people are staying with family or friends, added that school will resume today.
The Red Cross still is providing meals to those who need it in the borough, Firestone said.
Food is also available at the Pine Grove Hose Hook and Ladder Fire Company and from the Pine Grove Wesleyan Church.
More than 200 people have been fed at the fire company, James Hoke, a firefighter, said as he stirred a pot of macaroni and cheese and two women arrived seeking a meal.
The fire company is open from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. "until probably this coming weekend," Wolfe said, adding, "It's heart-wrenching to listen to some of their stories."
Wolfe also said volunteers have come from as far as Philadelphia to help and anyone interested in donating can drop contributions off at the firehouse.
Members of the Pine Grove Area girls' basketball teams helped with cleanup at the high school and with other work in the community.
"The biggest need that I see for the next few days is cleaning supplies," he said.
The Pine Grove Area Business and Community Association has established a fund to help victims of the flooding. Contributions can be forwarded to the Fulton Bank, 55 S.Tulpehocken St., Pine Grove, PA 17963.
People in need of clothing items can find them at the Pine Grove Wesleyan Church. Pastor Tim Moore said new socks and underwear are still needed.
"About 75 percent of this has come in the last three or four days," he said, referring to a large amount of clothing that has accumulated. Clothing for men, women and children is available as well as comforters, toys, personal hygiene products and pet food. Hours at the clothing site are 5 p.m. to 9 p.m.
Moore said up to 15 families have taken advantage of the clothing service at added, "The need's going to continue."
Brown Zerby said a curfew that had been imposed has expired and a boil-water advisory has been lifted.
A Red Cross press release indicated that weather-related events like Hurricane Irene and other storms resulted in the cancellation of scheduled blood drives, resulting in a shortfall in the blood supply. Anyone wishing to donate blood should call 800-RED CROSS or visit redcrossblood.org.
___ (c)2011 the Republican & Herald (Pottsville, Pa.) Visit the Republican & Herald (Pottsville, Pa.) at republicanherald.com Distributed by MCT Information Services
Load-Date: September 13, 2011



End of Document


DPH Updates List of Public Water Systems under Boil Water Advisory
Targeted News Service
September 14, 2011 Wednesday 3:46 AM  EST

Copyright 2011 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 260 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: HARTFORD, Conn. 
Body




The Connecticut Department of Public Health issued the following news release:
The Department of Public Health updated the list of public water systems under boil water advisory. Currently, 16 small public drinking water systems in the state are under a boil water advisory.
State health officials said it is important that residential customers served by systems that have issued a boil water advisory follow the guidance of their public water system. DPH is monitoring these systems and working to contact small public drinking water systems to determine their status and offer assistance as needed.
The following public drinking water systems are under a boil water advisory:
* Mar-Lea Park Apts, Ashford
* Elmwood Court LLC, Bethel
* First Church of Christ Congregational, East Haddam
* Whipples Mobile Home Park, Groton
* Quonnipaug Hills - Lower System, Guilford
* Quonnipaug Hills - Section I, Guilford
* Wellswood Estates Foundation, Inc., Hebron
* Cranberry Bog Apartments, Killingly
* Uconn Agronomy Research Farm, Mansfield
* Oakridge Village, Montville
* Stonington Institute - Main Building, North Stonington
* Chadwick Homeowners Assn., Inc., Old Lyme
* Region 18 Schools - Lyme Street, Old Lyme
* Brookview Water Company, Ridgefield
* Salem Town Center LLC, Salem
* Childrens Day School of Wilton, Wilton
The updated list of public water systems under a boil water advisory is also available online at www.ct.gov/dph/ (click on "Hurricane Irene: Important Health Information.")
Contact: William Gerrish, 860/509-7270
Copyright Targeted News Services
TNS mv45 110915-3583140
Load-Date: September 15, 2011



End of Document


BEACHES REOPEN, MORE BOIL WATER ORDERS LIFTED
US State News
September 14, 2011 Wednesday 1:27 PM  EST

Copyright 2011 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 281 words
Body




SAN DIEGO, Sept. 14 -- San Diego County issued the following press release:
Signs warning of sewage contamination were removed today from Torrey Pines Beach at Los Penasquitos Lagoon Outlet and Del Mar up to 15th St. An estimated 1.9 Million Gallon sewage spill occurred on Thursday Sept 8 which entered Los Penasquitos Lagoon.
In addition, the closure at Bayside Park in Chula Vista was also lifted today. This beach was closed due to an estimated 120,000-gallon sewage spill that entered Sweetwater River on Thursday Sept 8.
At this point all beach closures as a result of sewage contamination due to Thursday's power outage have been lifted.
BOIL WATER ORDERS LIFTED
Meanwhile, the County Department of Environmental Health has lifted the Boil Water Orders and Public Notifications effective immediately for the following:
1000 Trails Oakzanita Springs located at 11053 Hwy 79, Descanso, CA 91916
El Capitan Reservoir Recreation Area located at 16850 El Monte Road, Lakeside, CA 92040
El Monte County Park located at 15805 El Monte Road, Lakeside, CA 92040
Mt. Empire RV Park located at 29149 Hwy 94, Campo, CA 91906
Muir Industries located at 441 Tecate Road, Tecate, CA 91980
Due to the recent power outage, these public water systems lost pressure in the water distribution system. As a precaution, Boil Water Orders were issued until laboratory results show the water is free from bacterial contamination. Laboratory results for these water systems confirm the absence of bacteria in the water supply.
Check status of all outage-related boil water advisories For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com
Load-Date: September 15, 2011



End of Document


PA. FLOODS DAMAGED THOUSANDS OF BUILDINGS; FEDERAL FUNDS MADE AVAILABLE AS OBAMA DECLARES DISASTERS IN 19 COUNTIES
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 14, 2011 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION

Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: STATE; Pg. B-1
Length: 590 words
Byline: Michael Rubinkam and Peter Jackson, Associated Press
Body




ALLENTOWN, Pa. -- The enormity of the devastation caused by last week's record flooding began to emerge as President Barack Obama issued a disaster declaration for 19 Pennsylvania counties, and state officials on Tuesday released a preliminary estimate of more than 4,500 homes destroyed or damaged -- a number sure to rise significantly as more damage reports come in.
The disaster declaration frees up federal aid to individuals and businesses, including cash grants for temporary housing and home repairs as well as low-interest loans to cover uninsured property losses. It also makes federal funds available for hazard mitigation.
Megan Kanyuck, 26, of hard-hit Mocanaqua in Luzerne County, lost nearly everything when her apartment was deluged by several feet of Susquehanna River water.
The supermarket bakery worker, who has a 2-month-old daughter and is without much money to start over, said she plans to apply for federal disaster assistance to help get her back on her feet.
"I'm praying to God I get at least a little bit so I can find another place to live," she said.
Vice President Joe Biden planned to travel to northeastern Pennsylvania on Friday to survey storm damage, the White House announced.
At least 4,542 homes and businesses in the counties covered by Tuesday's declaration were damaged to some extent by flooding caused by remnants of Tropical Storm Lee, including more than 2,000 that were destroyed or sustained major damage, according to Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency spokesman Cory Angell.
But many counties and municipalities only performed a superficial assessment or concentrated on a few hard-hit areas as they worked quickly to meet minimum federal criteria for inclusion on the disaster list.
In Dauphin County alone, for example, a more complete tally revealed the storm destroyed or caused major damage to nearly 1,400 homes, businesses and apartment buildings -- and damage teams have yet to survey more than half the county's municipalities, said Scott Burford, the county's deputy chief clerk and emergency management agency spokesman. He estimated "north of $93 million" in damage to private property so far.
In Columbia County, where the Susquehanna crested at 32.75 feet at Bloomsburg, breaking a record set in 1904, officials reported 1,000 buildings with damage.
"That very well could be 2,000 by the time all this gets put together," said John Thomas, spokesman for the county's emergency management agency.
Lee, he added, "is going to be the measuring stick for a long while."
Wyoming County reported major and minor damage to 3,200 structures.
Teams are assessing damage in Philadelphia, Chester, Bucks, Montgomery and Northampton counties to determine whether they also should qualify for federal disaster assistance.
Beyond the devastation of private property, extensive flooding also damaged hundreds of roads, bridges, public buildings and water and sewer treatment plants in Pennsylvania. More than 140 state roads remained closed Tuesday, while seven sewer-treatment plants were out of service and 15 water-treatment plants issued boil-water advisories, either because they were out of service or were having trouble producing potable water.
State Agriculture Secretary George Greig toured several farms and said the storm caused widespread crop damage.
In Luzerne County, a dozen people were charged with the looting of evacuated homes.
District Attorney Jackie Musto Carroll called the burglaries "despicable."
At least 11 people were killed in last week's floods, according to state officials.
Graphic



 
PHOTO: Larry Deklinski/The News-Item: A woman, who wished not to be identified, walks around the remains of a house Tuesday in Orangeville after a creek flooded parts of this Columbia County town last week.
Load-Date: September 15, 2011



End of Document



Water Disruptions for More than Half of Texas; Vaccine Doses Backlogged Due to Weather; German Politicians Voice Support for AstraZeneca Shot; Biden Declares "America is Back," Pledges $4 Billion toward Global COVID-19 Vaccine Aid; U.S. Willing to Resume Talks with Iran on Nuclear Deal; Pro-Democracy Protesters Honor Woman Killed by Myanmar Police; How Some White Nationalists Profit from Hate; Harry and Meghan Won't Return as Working Royals. Aired 5-6a ET
CNN CNN NEWSROOM 5:00 AM EST
February 20, 2021 Saturday

Copyright 2021 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved 
Section: NEWS; International
Length: 7040 words
Byline: Kim Brunhuber, Omar Jimenez, Dianne Gallagher, Alexandra Field, Salma Abdelaziz, Alex Marquardt, Ramin Mostaghim, Paula Hancocks, Sara Sidner, Max Foster
Guests: Owais Durrani
Highlight: Power is back for most Texans, but the frigid weather crisis is far from over, the state's biggest issue now, access to clean drinking water. The White House says the severe weather this week created a backlog of 6 million coronavirus vaccine doses and extra shipments have been sent out to help things get back on track. According to government reports in German media, only 17 percent of AstraZeneca doses have been used due to public skepticism.
Body




[05:00:00]
(MUSIC PLAYING)
KIM BRUNHUBER, CNN ANCHOR (voice-over): Power is returning for most people in Texas. But water shortages and another night of freezing temperatures mean things are far from normal.
And that bad weather is affecting COVID vaccinations. The White House says shipments of 6 million doses have been delayed.
And --
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
JOE BIDEN (D), PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES: I'm sending a clear message to the world, America is back.
BRUNHUBER (voice-over): Joe Biden moves firmly away from Donald Trump's America first foreign policy in his first summit as president.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
BRUNHUBER (voice-over): Live from CNN World Headquarters in Atlanta, welcome to all of you watching here, in the United States, Canada and around the world. I'm Kim Brunhuber. This is CNN NEWSROOM.
(MUSIC PLAYING)
BRUNHUBER: Millions of Americans in the state of Texas are struggling to find drinking water after deadly winter storms left them without power for days. While the lights have largely come back on, more than half of the state's residents are being told to boil their water, if they have any at all.
Long lines are now the norm at mass water distribution sites as store shelves run bare. The damages are adding up, as frozen pipes burst and frigid temperatures persist. U.S. President Joe Biden says he'll sign a national disaster declaration to provide more resources. Omar Jimenez has more from the state capital, Austin. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
OMAR JIMENEZ, CNN CORRESPONDENT (voice-over): So you never even used your fireplace before this?
JENN STUDEBAKER, RESIDENT, AUSTIN, TEXAS: Oh, no.
JIMENEZ (voice-over): Jenn Studebaker and her family, in Austin, Texas, were burning chairs, pieces of bookshelves, before eventually scavenging for bits of wood without even a means to cut it.
STUDEBAKER: That hammer, actually is what we were splitting wood with.
JIMENEZ: Using their nearly abandoned fireplace now as a means of survival.
GRAYSON CRUISE, HIGH SCHOOL SENIOR: We would bring the head of a futon bed and put it right here. So --
STUDEBAKER: Get closer to the heat.
CRUISE: And get closer to the heat. And I would sleep right here. So we would all just kind of be huddling together.
JIMENEZ: Restless from the new mentality they've now had to adopt.
STUDEBAKER: Everyone's just, you know, thinking like we just make one more day, just get one more day. And it's like, well, what if it happens again tomorrow? Now we got to -- OK, we can't burn all of this.
JIMENEZ: And even though the powers on,
STUDEBAKER: No waters, not even bubbling, nothing.
JIMENEZ: The water isn't. And it's not just Austin, as they are among the millions across Texas under a boil water advisory.
In Houston, miles of long lines to pick up water at mass distribution sites.
GOV. GREG ABBOTT (R-TX): I talked to the President last night and he called to let me know that he was going to go ahead and approve the major disaster declaration that Texas would be submitting.
JIMENEZ: In San Antonio, this apartment complex burned to the ground as firefighters struggled to get enough water to fight it.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Our main concern is water supply. All these hydrants out here is dry. There's (INAUDIBLE) just frozen. There's no water.
JIMENEZ: Even members of Congress forced to get creative.
REP. SYLVIA GARCIA (D-TX): I'm going to fill my toilet with water so that I can be ready for later today. JIMENEZ: Without water and her Houston home Congresswoman Sylvia Garcia collected rainwater to flush your toilet.
And hospitals are struggling to care for an influx of patients amid an ongoing pandemic.
DR. ROBERT SALDANA, MEDICAL DIRECTOR EMERGENCY MEDICINE, HOUSTON METHODIST HOSPITAL: As more of our area hospitals were without power and water, many of their patients ended up at our facilities.
CHIEF CANDE FLORES, ABLIENE FIRE DEPARTMENT: Earlier today we had a situation where an elderly female walked out of her home and she was found in her backyard deceased. And that was directly related to the weather conditions.
JIMENEZ: Emergencies merging and leaving those already affected by the pandemic wondering where to go next.
STUDEBAKER: I lost half my income. And then finally we're getting here. What am I going to do? I mean, we can barely live here.
Sorry. It's like it just keep going and going and just this whole year, just keep going. And if we just make it one more month, then my tax return will come in or we get some funding. I can't pay my utility bills.
So, let us just have this tiny apartment. Please. Maybe some water. That would be nice to.
JIMENEZ: And water is that next frontier. It's still expected to be a multiday process but officials, at least here in Austin, are optimistic that they can get it restored by the end of the weekend.
Now on the electricity front, we are still seeing outages across the state but we're in a much better place than we were days ago. The good news, overall, is that Friday night was supposed to be the last night of freezing temperatures that we would see this week, giving Texans, this weekend, the chance to play offense for a change -- Omar Jimenez, CNN, Austin, Texas.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
BRUNHUBER: Well, as Omar mentioned in his powerful report there, hospitals are struggling as supplies run low. So to get some perspective from the front line, Dr. Owais Durrani joins me now.
[05:05:00]
BRUNHUBER: He's an emergency medicine resident at the University of Texas Health Science Center.
Thank you so much for joining us. We heard yesterday from the mayor of San Antonio, where you are, that 50 percent of the city either has no water or low pressure.
So how is your hospital and the others there coping with this? DR. OWAIS DURRANI, UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HEALTH SCIENCE CENTER: Yes, thanks for having me. As you mentioned, water is a huge issue. We're under a boil water advisory. There is also lots of pressure issues. So I will get you an example.
Lots of patients get dialysis at outpatient clinics. Over the past weeks or past week or so, those clinics have all been closed. And so, missing a session of dialysis can be life-threatening. And so, we are seeing a lot of those patients come into the hospitals.
My hospital, in particular, thankfully, has good water. But lots of hospitals around the city and maybe, about 25 to 50 miles outside of San Antonio, don't. We're seeing lots of those patients because they can't get dialysis, which is a water intensive treatment being transferred to our hospital.
Water is also necessary to keep many surgical tools and equipment cool. And then it's needed for boilers and kind of more of the mundane things like washing linens and getting uniforms clean for staff members.
So, water is crucial and it's going to be a main thing that we need to get back to make sure that hospitals like mine, that still do have water, are not overburdened. All the hospitals need to be able to kind of take care of those patients in their areas.
BRUNHUBER: And on top of the normal patients you see, what kind of injuries and conditions are you treating now related to this crisis?
DURRANI: Yes, so I would break it down into two phases. During the earlier part of the week, we were seeing a lot of injuries related to the cold itself. So, folks were warming themselves up using their car heaters in garages. They were using propane gas tanks indoors and in poorly ventilated areas. So, lots of carbon monoxide poisoning.
We were seeing lots of hand burns because people were burning things. And then, in San Antonio and a lot of the urban areas in Texas, we have a lot of homeless populations and so we were seeing lots of frostbite and lots of hypothermic patients coming in with extremely low body temperatures.
Over the last few days, as I mentioned, we have seen the results of clinics being closed and pharmacies being closed. And so, we are seeing patients missed dialysis, patients don't have diabetes or blood pressure medications and they are coming in with uncontrolled high blood pressure or uncontrolled levels of their sugar.
And they are needing to be admitted to the hospital. So, lots of downstream effects that we are seeing.
BRUNHUBER: Yes, it's a real failure by the state here that's -- that's literally cost lives.
DURRANI: Absolutely. You know, on kind of the surface level, you see, you know, a certain number of deaths that are related to the hypothermia or whatever the case may be. But there are so many downstream effects.
And then, we've, you know, essentially, not been providing any COVID vaccinations over the past week or so because clinics and pharmacies have been closed. And so that is going to add up to lives lost as well. And so, the entire picture of how much damage this has done to the health of Texans is immeasurable at this point.
BRUNHUBER: I mean, everyone at the hospital, you know, nurses, doctors like yourself, hospital staff, you're part of the community. You're, also, affected by the -- the lack of power and water and so on.
How are you all coping and helping each other through this?
DURRANI: Yes, it's been a long week. You know, it's been a long year, to be honest with the pandemic. And then, this last week has felt like a month or a year in itself. We, as you mentioned, are Texans. We are not used to driving on icy roads. And so, it was a challenge over the past week.
It was inspiring to see my colleagues, you know, lots of them, doctors, nurses, ancillary staff, sleeping at the hospital overnight to make sure that they could be there for their jobs and their patients in the mornings.
Those of us that were lucky enough to live near the hospital, we would, you know, bring food and board games and other, you know, kind o, essentials to our colleagues, who could not go home. And so, Texans are resilient. It's been a tough week. But we've come together, and it's been inspiring, for sure.
BRUNHUBER: Yes. Listen. I know you have family as well in Houston. And everyone's going through this together. So, we wish you, your family, all your patients, of course, everyone there, at the hospital, all the best as you deal with this -- with this crisis. Thank you so much, Dr. Owais Durrani of the University of Texas Health Sciences Center in San Antonio. Appreciate it.
DURRANI: Thank you. I appreciate it.
(WEATHER REPORT)
[05:10:00]
BRUNHUBER: Well, El Paso is one city that avoided the disaster playing out across Texas. While much of the state has been struggling with power outages and water shortages, El Paso learned a hard lesson from a decade ago. CNN's Dianne Gallagher has the story.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
DIANNE GALLAGHER, CNN CORRESPONDENT (voice-over): No power. No water. It's been the same story across the state of Texas this week. Well, most of it.
RALPH LOYA, EL PASO RESIDENT: They're freezing in San Antonio, Austin, Dallas, Fort Worth, Rio Grande Valley. We're very, very lucky. GALLAGHER (voice-over): The reason the lights never really went out in a major way here in El Paso is a bit more complicated and rooted in experience.
LOYA: We had gas shortages, water shortages, power outages.
GALLAGHER (voice-over): Ralph Loya, like everyone else in El Paso, can't forget the 2011 deep freeze.
LOYA: It was a catastrophe that hit the city that we just weren't prepared for.
GALLAGHER (voice-over): El Paso Electric Company's Senior Vice President of Operations Steve Buraczyk was in the control room 10 years ago this month when it all came crashing down.
STEVEN BURACZYK, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT OF OPERATIONS, EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY: We actually had over three days where the temperature in El Paso never got above freezing. And we lost most of our local units. Those impacts lasted for weeks and weeks after. And so, we made that decision that we were going to harden our assets, that we were going to invest in new technology and invest in new infrastructure.
GALLAGHER (voice-over): The winterize plant that manager Albert Montano is showing us around today exists in part because of that big freeze.
ALBERT MONTANO, PROJECT ENGINEER, EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY: Were designed to run in the summer. But there's these few times where we have an overnight low that we really got to get all the systems up and ready. Then our team was able to do that.
BURACZYK: It's a lot easier like with a brand new plant because now we're designing it for minus 10. You have the top technology, its state of the art. And so you can design in these redundant systems.
GALLAGHER (voice-over): And built-in redundancies that needed to be tapped into this week when natural gas supply dropped.
MONTANO: We went into diesel operations with the first unit on Monday of this week. And that's when we started seeing issues with gas pipeline pressure.
GALLAGHER (voice-over): But another risk in El Paso isn't in the dark. It's located so far from other Lone Star cities that it's not on the same power grid is 90 percent of the rest of Texas. There were three power grids in the country, western, that's what El Paso was on, Eastern and Texas, the only state to have its own grid in part to avoid certain federal regulations. This week, the Texas system which is operated by the Electric Reliability Council of Texas or ERCOT failed and has faced accusations of being unprepared for the storm.
GOV. GREG ABBOTT (R-TX): I'm taking responsibility for the current status at ERCOT. Again, I find what's happened unacceptable.
GALLAGHER (voice-over): Planning for a once in a decade storm is expensive, but it is possible and worth it, says El Paso Electric, if it prevents disasters like what we're seeing in Texas this week.
BURACZYK: When we saw what happened to our community in 2011, we made a decision and we said never again.
(END VIDEOTAPE) BRUNHUBER: Just ahead on CNN NEWSROOM, bad weather in the U.S., as we heard, is forcing a delay in the shipments of millions of vaccine doses. So, we will find out when they're likely to get delivered. Stay with us.
(MUSIC PLAYING)
[05:15:00]
(MUSIC PLAYING)
BRUNHUBER: Brutal winter weather here in the U.S. is taking a huge toll on the fight against coronavirus. It's delayed the delivery of vaccines to many areas and it's slowing down the rate that people are getting the shot. CNN's Alexandra Field has more.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
ALEXANDRA FIELD, CNN CORRESPONDENT (voice-over): All 50 states, now feeling the impact of the deadly winter storm, 6 million vaccine doses, now delayed. Shipments of more than 700,000 shots to California alone, still not arriving, creating a ripple effect and leaving people who need shots, waiting.
GOV. GAVIN NEWSOM (D-CA): We're working with provider network, complicated 1,100-plus providers in the state, a lot of increase -- a lot of calls, a lot of stress.
MICHELE ROBERTS, ACTING ASSISTANT. HEALTH SECRETARY, WASHINGTON STATE: We estimate more than 90 percent of this week's allocation will arrive late because of the weather out east. FIELD: Weather derailing every part of the process from vaccine manufacturing sites to distribution hubs, power outages across the country affecting as many as 13 vaccination sites. Until the power is back, they can't get new supplies.
But 1.4 million doses are final on the move again today. Health officials say UPS and FedEx will make Saturday and Sunday deliveries this week.
[05:20:00]
FIELD (voice-over): And they're tasking states with making up for lost time next week.
GOV. JOHN BEL EDWARDS (D-LA): It appears that next week we're going to be trying to double up.
DR. MARC BOOM, PRESIDENT AND CEO, HOUSTON METHODIST: It will be a little slower than usual. But we'll catch up.
FIELD: The delays coming just as so many states across the country were starting to close the gap between doses received and shots in arms. 37 states now say they've administered more than 75 percent of what they've received. Four states are over 90 percent.
GOV. ANDY BESHEAR (D-KY): We've now got over 200 vaccine distribution sites. We're ready for more. We have been told to expect a significant increase.
FIELD: The latest estimates suggest the U.S. is in for a big increase in vaccines. If Pfizer and Moderna are able to provide what they've promised in the next three months, the U.S. should have three times as many shots on hand. New study suggests even a single dose of the Pfizer vaccine could be highly effective, but Dr. Anthony Fauci says just one is just too risky.
DR. ANTHONY FAUCI, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF ALLERGY AND INFECTIOUS DISEASES: The reason is even though you can get a fair degree of, quote, protection after a single dose, it clearly is not durable.
FIELD: Also, on the vaccine front, Dr. Anthony Fauci is saying we should have data on vaccine safety on high school age students, perhaps, by the fall or around the time school starts.
Data concerning even younger students, elementary school age students, unlikely to arrive before the first quarter of 2022. Certainly, something so many families are anxious for -- in New York, Alexandra Field, CNN.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
BRUNHUBER: On Friday, President Biden took a tour of Pfizer's vaccine manufacturing plant in Michigan. Despite the delays in vaccine shipments, President Joe Biden has promised to have enough vaccines available for nearly every American by the end of July.
But he struggled to answer when the country might return to some semblance of normal.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
BIDEN: Getting the vaccine and having it available is not the same as putting it in someone's arms. This is going to be a continuous rolling effort. So, we'll have had -- we'll have ordered, much of which will have been distributed, over 600 million doses by the end of July. July 29th is the expected date. But that could change.
Look what is happening with the weather now, for example. It's slowing up the distribution right now. But I believe we'll be approaching normalcy by the end of this year. And God willing, this Christmas will be different than last. But I can't make that commitment to you.
(END VIDEO CLIP) BRUNHUBER: Countries across Europe are hoping they can get back to normal, too. But Germany is being cautious about easing its lockdown measures. The health minister says the variant, first identified in the U.K., has been found in one out of every five people in Germany who tests positive.
Meanwhile, Wales is extending its COVID precautions. The first minister says the lockdown in place since December will last another three weeks, but some measures would be relaxed a bit.
And French president Emmanuel Macron is urging E.U. members to allocate 4 percent to 5 percent of their supply of vaccine to developing countries.
All right. Let's turn now to CNN's Salma Abdelaziz, who is joining us from London.
Salma, I wasn't sure about this, one of the fears health experts raised was that, with several vaccines being used, people would start saying, you know, basically, I don't want this one. I want that one instead, based on -- on the perceived effectiveness. And we're already seeing that playing out in Europe and especially in Germany. Tell us about that.
SALMA ABDELAZIZ, CNN PRODUCER: Absolutely, Kim. It's -- it's an interesting and concerning trend that we're seeing in Germany. Essentially, the Oxford University and AstraZeneca vaccine there, those doses, only 17 percent of them have been used.
That's according to government reports in German media, 17 percent of those doses. German media calling the Oxford University vaccine a shelf warmer.
The mayor of Berlin, so upset about this that he went out and said, I will not have tens of thousands of doses of a vaccine sitting on shelves while people need these immunizations.
If you don't take this vaccine, this is the mayor of Berlin, if you don't take this vaccine, you can stand in the back of the line. He is going to turn you around, essentially. That was his threat because there is so much concern, literally, about these tens of thousands of doses sitting on the shelf.
And all this originates from a spat between the E.U. and the U.K. over the Oxford AstraZeneca vaccine. Some critics saying the original data on efficacy was unclear, confusing, maybe even incorrect.
Germany has, of course, now approved that vaccine for use but only for people under 65. So it's being used among the young, among health care workers.
But still, that sense of that debate has, obviously, really imbued people with doubt and at a time of vaccine hesitancy, of course, Kim, that is concerning.
And we are not just seeing this in Germany. There's been reports out of France, Sweden, Austria of local authorities, local groups, asking for the Moderna vaccine over the Oxford University and AstraZeneca vaccine.
[05:25:00]
ABDELAZIZ: Now there is a difference in efficacy. The Oxford University and AstraZeneca vaccine is about around 63 percent effective. The Moderna vaccine, around 95 percent effective, according to the figures.
But of course, all of these doses have to be used. I can give you an example, just here in London. I actually sort of witnessed the opposite of that, at a vaccination center, where people were asking for the Oxford vaccine because of national pride. Of course, developed right here, in the U.K.
And it's important to remember, in these vaccination centers, a lot is going on really quickly. You have a few-minute slot with a medical worker. You have to explain your medical history. You have to explain any symptoms that you might be having.
And now, you might have to explain the efficacy of a vaccine. I was at one vaccination center, where the primary language wasn't even English. So imagine having to do that in multiple languages at a vaccination center. It is a complicated picture, Kim, and it's only going to raise that vaccine hesitancy concern around the globe.
BRUNHUBER: Yes, absolutely. Just crazy to hear, you know, people talking about a vaccine as a shelf warmer where, you know, some people here, in the U.S., were dressing up as grandmothers to -- to get their hands on the vaccine. Incredible. Thanks so much for that reporting there, Salma Abdelaziz, in London.
In Moscow, detained opposition leader Alexei Navalny has had his three-year prison sentence reduced by 1.5 months. Navalny was in court to appeal an earlier decision to convert his suspended sentence in a 2014 embezzlement case into prison time.
Navalny's lawyer petitioned the court to release him from detention but, considering time served, his current sentence in prison is now around two years, six months and two weeks.
Navalny earlier also asked the judge to allow video recording for the hearing for the sake of transparency. The judge denied journalists permission to do that but said there would be a recording of the verdict. Navalny has another court appearance, later today, on an unrelated defamation case.
Joe Biden stepped onto the virtual world stage on Friday as he renewed America's solidarity with its oldest allies and tried to erase all doubt that the Trump era was over. We'll have that story, straight ahead. Stay with us.
(MUSIC PLAYING)
[05:30:00]
(MUSIC PLAYING)
BRUNHUBER: And welcome back to all of you watching here in the U.S., Canada and around the world.
U.S. President Joe Biden left no doubt on Friday that the America first foreign policy of the past four years won't be part of the present. He drew a line between himself and his predecessor in speeches before the G7 and the Munich Security Conference.
It was held virtually because of the pandemic, of course. CNN's Alex Marquardt reports from Washington.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
BIDEN: America is back.
ALEX MARQUARDT, CNN SENIOR NATIONAL SECURITY CORRESPONDENT (voice- over): It might have been virtual, but Biden's first return to the world stage was no less of a seismic shift for U.S. foreign policy.
BIDEN: America is back. The transatlantic alliance is back. And we are not looking backward. We are looking forward together.
MARQUARDT: In a speech alongside the leaders of France, Germany and Britain, Biden vowed to reengage with Europe, to confront the rise of China, Russia's bullying and the threat to democracy around the world.
BIDEN: Democracy doesn't happen by accident. We have to defend it. Fight for it. Strengthen it. Renew it.
MARQUARDT: Biden's first visit to an agency as president was at the State Department, a clear signal that he plans to reverse or dramatically change course from Donald Trump's inward looking, self- centered approach.
DONALD TRUMP, FORMER PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES: From this day forward, it is going to be only America first. America first.
BIDEN: American and alliances are our greatest asset and leading with diplomacy means standing shoulder to shoulder with our allies.
MARQUARDT: One of Trump's first moves was to pull the U.S. out of the Iran nuclear deal and impose the so-called maximum pressure campaign. Now, the Biden administration says it is ready to talk again.
TRUMP: This was a horrible one-sided deal that should have never, ever been made. It didn't bring calm. It didn't bring peace. And it never will.
BIDEN: The threat of nuclear proliferation also continues to require careful diplomacy and cooperation among us. We need transparency and communication to minimize the risk of strategic misunderstanding or mistakes. MARQUARDT: Today, the U.S. officially re-entered the Paris climate accord which Trump had withdrawn from and repeatedly criticized.
TRUMP: I was elected to represent the citizens of Pittsburgh, not Paris.
BIDEN: Together, we need to invest in the technological innovations that will power our clean energy futures and enable us to build a clean energy solutions to global markets.
MARQUARDT: President Biden was speaking to a friendly European audience, welcoming him with open arms. The British prime minister even saying that the U.S. is unreservedly back as the leader of the free world. Now, that does not mean however that they're going to be in lockstep and that Europe is going to simply follow the U.S.
Europe has become more independent during the past four years of Trump, forging its own path and will, in the future, have significant differences with the U.S. on the key issues of China and Russia -- Alex Marquardt, CNN, Washington.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
BRUNHUBER: Well, anyone who's sat through a virtual meeting knows how important the mute button is. But even world leaders forget sometimes. Listen to this moment from the Munich Security Conference when the German chancellor had to be reminded to hit her mute button.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
BORIS JOHNSON, U.K. PRIME MINISTER: (INAUDIBLE) wave (ph) at the enemy.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: All right.
JOHNSON: All right.
ANGELA MERKEL, CHANCELLOR OF GERMANY: (INAUDIBLE).
JOHNSON: Turn your (INAUDIBLE) off, Angela. That's OK. It's all right. You need to mute.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
BRUNHUBER: The White House says it's prepared to begin talking with Iran about nuclear issues as part of an international group, if Iran is willing. But President Biden's national security adviser also says Iran needs to show some good faith as a route to reopening diplomacy.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
JAKE SULLIVAN, U.S. NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISER: One of our concerns right now is that Iran is presently threatening to move even further out of compliance, to refuse to cooperate with the International Atomic Energy Agency and the work it is trying to do to ensure nothing in Iran's program is being used for weapons purposes. So, I think the first order of business here would be for the Iranians to take the decision to stop the process of moving further out of compliance.
[05:35:00]
SULLIVAN: And then I do believe that there is a diplomatic pathway to getting to an ultimate agreement in which we can all have confidence that Iran's nuclear program has a lid on it, the kind of lid that was on it when we were actually all in the joint comprehensive plan of action together.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
BRUNHUBER: And with me now from Tehran is journalist Ramin Mostaghim.
Thank you so much for joining us. So Biden making overtures to Iran with that offer of a joint meeting. The White House spokesperson said, basically, the ball's in Iran's court.
So what's been the reaction?
Will Iran accept if the U.S. doesn't lift all sanctions?
RAMIN MOSTAGHIM, CNN CORRESPONDENT: Kim, what is regarded in American administration as a overture or a path -- diplomatic pathway for negotiation here, official thinks that it is actually forming coalitions against Iran because they believe that they have done everything they -- they should have done.
And also, they have left no stone unturned to save nuclear deal. Even one year after President Trump pulled out from the nuclear deal, they stop -- they didn't stop cooperating.
Now they say, enough is enough. We do not want any negotiation, unless all the sanctions are lifted and lifting sanctions are verified by us. And then, we can start negotiation.
Therefore, we can say, on Tuesday, Iran is going to and is determined to stop what is your cooperations with IAEA, meaning, no more additional protocol, no more IAEA inspectors to have a snap inspection inside Iranian soil, Kim.
BRUNHUBER: All right. Well, thank you so much for that analysis, Ramin Mostaghim in Tehran.
MOSTAGHIM: Thank you.
BRUNHUBER: Pro-democracy protesters in Myanmar have now entered their third week. And despite the military's efforts, they don't show any sign of letting up.
Anti-coup demonstrators are out in the streets again this hour, demanding a return to democracy and the release of ousted civilian leader Aung San Suu Kyi. The military leaders who deposed the civilian government on February 1st are trying to put a stop to the flow of information online. And they've cut off internet access for the sixth straight night.
CNN's Paula Hancocks is monitoring the situation from Seoul.
Paula, tell us more about the young woman who was shot and what affect her death is having on the protest movement there.
PAULA HANCOCKS, CNN CORRESPONDENT: Well, Kim, this was a 25-year-old woman, Mya Thwe Thwe Khaing, and she had been shot on February 9th. She was shot in the head and has been in critical condition since that point.
On Friday, her family members confirmed that she had succumbed to her injuries and -- and had died. Now we did have video of the protest itself. You can see the water cannon being used by security forces. And as protesters are running away, a woman collapses to the ground.
Now just a little earlier this Saturday, I spoke to the two doctors who were treating the protester. And they said that she never regained consciousness and that the -- the bullet was, in fact, a live bullet, a real bullet. And what we'd heard from police, of course, was that they said that they were using anti-riot procedures.
But the doctors said it was definitely a live bullet. So, this has galvanized the movement over the past 10 days. She has become somewhat of a symbol of the pro-democracy movement. And now, of course, with her passing on Friday, that is just increasing.
We've seen a number of vigils for this particular woman. She is the first casualty, since the -- the February 1st military coup. And certainly, when people are out on the streets, you hear them chanting for Aung San Suu Kyi, for the leaders that they want to be released but also for this protester who lost her life. Kim.
BRUNHUBER: So then, what about the regional players in Asia?
Can we expect China or the other members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations to -- to exert any pressure on the military in Myanmar here?
HANCOCKS: Well, China and Russia have actually been reticent to do so. We've seen some -- some very strong condemnation from much of the rest of the world, from the U.N., the U.S., many other leaders, saying the world is watching and saying there will be consequences if you use force against protesters to the military.
We're not hearing that from the likes of China and Russia. China, for example, does have strong business interests and strong connections to Myanmar although, worth pointing out, that they don't -- they haven't just worked with the -- the previous military dictatorship.
They also worked with the civilian government. But protesters are particularly angry at China. We have seen a number of times and today as well, this Saturday, they've been protesting outside the Chinese embassy.
[05:40:00] HANCOCKS: They believe that China's playing an undue role in what is happening and is supporting the military. So certainly, I don't think that anyone is really expecting China to be overly critical of the coup.
BRUNHUBER: All right. Thanks so much for that. Paula Hancocks, in Seoul.
Straight ahead on CNN NEWSROOM, some right-wing extremists are going underground to profit off their hate. So we'll explain how they are getting away with it next. Stay with us.
(MUSIC PLAYING)
(MUSIC PLAYING)
BRUNHUBER: Well, social media sites have been cracking down on hate speech. But despite this, some right-wing extremists, including some who livestreamed the deadly riot at the U.S. Capitol and some who are still hiding from the law, are continuing to fundraise online and spreading hate. CNN's Sara Sidner shows us how they're doing it.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: The Jews are the terrorists.
SARA SIDNER, CNN NATIONAL CORRESPONDENT (voice-over): Some neo-Nazis evading the law are profiting from their hate.
ROBERT WARREN RAY, FUGITIVE: The whole concept of civic nationalism is just ridiculous.
ANDREW ANGLIN, "THE DAILY STORMER": And the fact that Jews control the media.
SIDNER (voice-over): Making money from online donations and getting away with it. They've been gaming the system for years. But after the deadly white supremacists' rally in Charlottesville --
RIOTERS: Jews will not replace us!
SIDNER (voice-over): -- mainstream social media sites like Twitter and Facebook and payment systems like PayPal started banning them. Since then, they've been jumping from platform to platform soliciting donations in cryptocurrencies for their racist and anti-Semitic tirades.
JOHN BAMBENEK, CYBERSECURITY EXPERT: Kind of a form of social media influencer gone wrong.
SIDNER (voice-over): Cybersecurity expert, John Bambenek, has been following the donations.
SIDNER: What kind of money are these known neo-Nazis and white supremacists making?
BAMBENEK: Most of them, the prominent ones that - that have made the news, so they're making six figures, over six figures worth of Bitcoin, in terms of U.S. dollar equivalence.
SIDNER (voice-over): This streaming and gaming site called DLive became a new favorite with extremists.
[05:45:00]
SIDNER (voice-over): Users tip in so called Lemons, which can be converted into cryptocurrency or cash.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Now, let's go.
SIDNER (voice-over): Far-right extremist Tim Gionet, known as "Baked Alaska," used DLive to livestream the deadly Capitol breach.
RIOTERS: America first!
SIDNER (voice-over): Collecting donations as it happened.
MEGAN SQUIRE, ONLINE EXTREMISM EXPERT, ELON UNIVERSITY: It's a video gaming system platform mixed with cryptocurrency, mixed with video livestreaming and all of that with this layer of white supremacy and neo-Nazi actors.
SIDNER (voice-over): Take this guy...
ANGLIN: It's a lot easier to just say, "The Jews did it"
SIDNER (voice-over): -- Andrew Anglin, a Holocaust denier, who runs one of the most prolific neo-Nazi websites on the internet and gets donations online.
SQUIRE: He was in the top 10 though, as far as earnings on the platform.
SIDNER (voice-over): Anglin is also in hiding, running from a $14 million civil judgment against him. A judge found him liable for encouraging his online troll army to harass a Jewish mother and her young son.
We first visited Tanya Gersh in 2017, after Anglin published her name and address online, leading to non-stop threats and intimidation.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: I hope you die.
You worthless (INAUDIBLE).
You stupid, ugly (INAUDIBLE), Ms. Tanya Gersh.
TANYA GERSH, HARASSMENT SURVIVOR: I had a lot of phone calls with gunshots. That sound kind of still makes me sick.
SIDNER (voice-over): To this day, Gersh is incensed about what happened.
GERSH: We are not worthy of being hated. We are very loving. And it's so important that the world knows that, Sara.
It's so important, because haters don't know who they're hating. They're making money off of our pain. It's time to set some boundaries. Not all speech, not all writing is free. It is not free, if it terrorizes another human being.
SIDNER (voice-over): Tanya Gersh and her family haven't seen a dime of the $14 million the court says Anglin owes them.
Anglin is holding on to about a half million dollars in Bitcoin, according to Bambenek's latest review of his crypto wallets. And Anglin received Bitcoin valued at nearly $600,000 over the past six years.
Another neo-Nazi getting crypto donations for hate, Robert Warren Ray, nicknamed "Azzmador." We caught up with him in 2017, as white supremacists gathered in Houston, saying they were there to protect Confederate monuments.
SIDNER: You said that the Holocaust, you don't believe that the Holocaust happened?
RAY: No. Show me a piece of evidence. Nobody has shown me a single --
SIDNER: There is evidence everywhere.
RAY: -- piece of evidence.
SIDNER: Why do you hate Blacks and Jews so much?
RAY: Well, I don't hate Blacks. I hate the Jews because they are behind all this.
SIDNER (voice-over): The 54-year-old neo-Nazi is a fugitive. Ray was indicted for illegally using tear gas against counterprotesters during the Charlottesville "Unite the Right" rally. He failed to show up for all of his video court appearances.
While evading justice, he did show up here, on DLive, getting donations, while spewing hate.
Megan Squire also studies online extremists and their earnings at Elon University.
SIDNER: How successful have neo-Nazis and white supremacists been in making money on DLive?
SQUIRE: Unfortunately, they've been very successful. I was taken aback by the amount of money that was being donated from this much younger demographic.
SIDNER (voice-over): In a statement, DLive told CNN, after January 6th, the company established a new policy, under which community guideline violations will trigger automatic suspensions. DLive also said it was appalled that a number of rioters in the U.S. Capitol abused the platform to livestream their actions.
Experts say the gamelike arena of DLive is introducing young people into a dark world of hate.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Thank you, teammates.
SIDNER (voice-over): And having cash on hand could make extremists even more dangerous.
SIDNER: Tim, who you saw livestreaming while breaching the Capitol on that streaming and gaming service, DLive, well, he was eventually arrested and accused in the January 6th insurrection.
As for Robert Warren Ray and Andrew England, both neo-Nazis, they have not been found and they did not return any of our requests for comment -- Sara Sidner, CNN, Los Angeles.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
BRUNHUBER: Unbelievable.
We'll be right back.
(MUSIC PLAYING)
[05:50:00]
(MUSIC PLAYING)
BRUNHUBER: Prince Harry and Meghan Markle have made their break from British royal duties official. The not unexpected news comes as the duke and duchess work out career deals and prepare for a high-profile interview that has the U.K. abuzz with anticipation. Max Foster takes a look.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
MAX FOSTER, CNN LONDON CORRESPONDENT (voice-over): It has been nearly a year since Harry and Meghan waved goodbye to royal duties.
Their aim?
A more peaceful life in North America. Now, after months of talks, the split is final. The couple agreeing with the queen not to return as working members of the British royal family.
The news came in a statement from Buckingham Palace.
"The monarchy was saddened by their decision," it said, but the pair were still much loved members of the family.
Touching words yet there have been months of tense discussions over what the Duke and Duchess of Sussex will have to give up in order to pursue their own careers and private incomes.
The queen confirmed that her grandson and his wife will be stripped of their honorary tighter and patronages. Prince Harry, an ex-soldier, who served on the front lines of Afghanistan, will have to cut cherished official roles with the military, as well as the commonwealth and sporting associations.
It is a blow to the couple but not a surprise. They signed a raft of lucrative media deals. The palace has long said, they could not represent the queen after leading, what it said, was a life of public service.
The couple responded through a spokesman, saying, pointedly, "We can all live a life of service. Service is universal.
[05:55:00]
FOSTER: But for Harry and Meghan, who still make front page news in the U.K., there is no way back now to royal life. Less than three years after a fairytale wedding and a royal welcome for the birth of their first child, Archie, it is clear they are heading in a different direction.
They have moved to California, built an independent life, all whilst pursuing legal battles against the British media. And a new baby is on the way. So there is a lot for the couple to talk about when they sit down for an interview with talk show host Oprah Winfrey, to be broadcast next month.
And they are no longer restricted in what they can say, now that they have cut official ties with the British monarchy -- Max Foster, CNN, London.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
BRUNHUBER: Well, NASA is posting amazing photos of its Perseverance rover, which landed dramatically on Mars on Thursday.
So just look at the picture there on the right. A different spacecraft in orbit caught this view of the parachute, which carried the rover down to the Red Planet's surface after its 300 million mile journey from Earth.
And then, this selfie here. The rover being lowered on cables from the spacecraft's sky crane before transmitting a color view of the landing area in an old lakebed. And Perseverance also showed off one of its six wheels. The rover's mission is to look for signs of ancient Martian life.
And we have some breaking news here. Japan's Naomi Osaka has captured the Australian Open in Melbourne in her typical powerful style. Moments ago, the 23-year old dominated American Jennifer Brady in the women's singles final, winning in straight sets.
This is Osaka's second victory of the tournament and her fourth grand slam title. She is truly unstoppable right now. That wraps this hour of CNN NEWSROOM. I'm Kim Brunhuber. For viewers in the U.S. and Canada, "NEW DAY" is ahead. For our international viewers, it's "AFRICAN VOICES CHANGEMAKERS."
Load-Date: February 20, 2021



End of Document


Airplane Debris Falls On Denver Neighborhoods After Takeoff; Safe Water Now The Biggest Need In Storm-Battered Texas; Biden Makes Clean Break From Trump On Foreign Policy; Teachers Push For Vaccines Amid School Reopening Debate. Aired 8-9p ET
CNN CNN NEWSROOM 8:00 PM EST
February 20, 2021 Saturday

Copyright 2021 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved 
Section: NEWS; Domestic
Length: 6549 words
Byline: Pamela Brown, Lucy Kafanov, Omar Jimenez, David Soucie, David Sanger
Guests: Mike Massimino, Jim Gugger, Kirby Klements, Randi Weingarten
Highlight: United flight suffers engine failure after takeoff in Denver. United plane lands safely after engine fails, parts fall onto neighborhoods. Police say, massive debris field of fallen airplane parts stretches over a mile. Some Austin breweries are handing out safe drinking water. President Biden is looking for a reset on the world stage.
Body




MIKE MASSIMINO, FORMER ASTRONAUT: It's not just about going there, it's about making life better on Earth.
[20:00:03]
And that's really what our space program is all about.
PAMELA BROWN, CNN HOST: All right. Mike, thanks for laying it all out for us. We really appreciate it.
MASSIMINO: You bet, Pamela. Thanks for having me.
BROWN: I'm Pamela Brown in Washington. Welcome to our viewers in the United States and around the world. You're in the CNN NEWSROOM.
And we are following breaking news tonight out of Colorado. Look, stunning new images of the moment an engine failed on a United Airlines flight out of Denver this afternoon. Eyewitnesses say it was, quote, raining metal in Broomfield, Colorado, when a Boeing 777 with 241 passengers and crew on board started shedding debris that fell to the ground.
And you can see here in terrifying video posted on social media, allegedly showing one of the engines failing. This was shortly after the United Airlines flight to Honolulu took off. The plane turned around for an emergency landing. There were no injuries to anyone on board and there are no known injuries on the ground from the falling debris.
And here is audio from the very moment the pilot issued his mayday call to Denver air traffic control. Listen.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Mayday, mayday, United 328, 328, heavy mayday, mayday aircraft.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Yes, 328 heavy, (INAUDIBLE).
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Denver departure United 328, heavy mayday, aircraft just experienced heavy failure need to return immediately.
(END VIDEO CLIP) BROWN: I'm going to turn now to our Lucy Kafanov. She is right there at the scene. What are you seeing, what are you hearing there, Lucy?
LUCY KAFANOV, CNN CORRESPONDENT: Well, Pam, the fact that there were no injuries to either the 241 people on board or any of the people on the ground here in Colorado is truly a miracle. Where I am standing right now, and I just want to give you a sense of sort of scope of this debris field, down behind this police car, down that street is a massive park. There is a dog park.
There is a soccer field. This is an area -- it's snowing now, but it was pretty good weather earlier this afternoon, where kids were practicing soccer, families were out walking their dogs. People were enjoying the weather.
There were a lot of folks out and about, not as much, obviously, in the time of COVID, but still a lot of people enjoying the day. So when this incident took place and this debris of plane material started raining down from the skies, a lot of people could have been injured. It's a miracle they have not been.
I'm going to walk over here, the street, the residential street that you see now behind me. It's too dark to really point out the details, but there's a big R.V. truck and on the other side of that is where that sort of now iconic image of that round sort of piece of the engine that landed right in front of one family's house. No one was hurt, but that is over there.
And all over this neighborhood, there is police tape, there is do not cross tape, there are pieces of debris, some very large. I saw something that almost looked like the casing of the engine. It was white and very, very large, laying sort of sectioned off by police tape. And then smaller pieces sort of wherever you look as well.
And police are urging residents to phone the non-emergency line, to report the debris, trying to not touch it. They're warning people not to touch it because investigators really still have yet to determine the scope of this debris field. It's a very large area here that has been affected. And, again, an absolute miracle that nobody was hurt, Pam.
BROWN: A miracle is right. Lucy Kafanov, thanks so much for that.
And right now, I want to talk Jim Gugger, he is a retired commercial airline pilot who flew the 777 for many years. That is the type of airline involved in this incident today. Jim, thanks for coming on. I look forward to hearing about what you have to say.
I mean, this video, Jim, and we're going to show our viewers now probably the most horrifying thing an airline passenger can see. This video that we're going to put up right here posted on social media that allegedly shows this plane's engine today on fire with giant pieces missing and falling off. This is the stuff of nightmares.
As a pilot for nearly 40 years, what is your reaction to this, what stands out to you? JIM GUGGER, RETIRED COMMERCIAL AIRPLANE PILOT (voice over): Hi, Pamela. I probably have a very different perspective on it, as do all pilots that have been trained in this type of a thing. And believe it or not, these are things that we are trained in, and this is just -- and I'm not going to say it's a typical day at the office, but it's something that we're trained to address. And I look at it as though it's just, you know, nothing life-threatening or anything like that.
BROWN (voice over): Okay. So you're thinking that as a pilot, and that was reflected in the mayday call, the pilot was very calm.
[20:05:00]
But I want to just pick apart what we're seeing here in that video that we just saw, because our Pete Muntean is saying that they didn't dump the fuel, and that that is normally something you would do, that would standard procedure in a situation like this. What is your takeaway on that front?
GUGGER (voice over): Fuel dumping happens if the aircraft is too heavy to land. And when you take off, you've obviously got all this fuel to get you to your destination. And when you get to your destination, that fuel is burned off. So you're significantly lighter when you arrive at your destination. If you have to return for landing in a case like this, and you're too heavy to land, then you're dumping fuel.
Now, I don't know how much fuel they had, how many passengers they had, so I would assume they were light enough that dumping fuel was not necessary.
BROWN (voice over): So when you're watching this video though, if you would, tell our viewers what they're seeing exactly.
GUGGER (voice over): You know, I'll be honest, I don't have the video in front of me, I didn't realize we were going to discuss the video. I did see it earlier. And, yes, I mean, the engine --
BROWN (voice over): It's the video of the engine on fire, just so you know, it's the one from a Twitter user with the engine on fire while the plane is still in the air.
GUGGER (voice over): Yes. Any time -- not to make it sound like this is something that is, you know, common or anything like that, but, you know, you've got something with moving parts, you're always going to have failures. And, obviously, this engine had some sort of a failure. They're spinning very fast. And when you have a failure like that, it's not -- I mean, it's not rare for parts to come apart. It's essentially exploding.
And so what they're looking at is parts that have been, you know, exploded off, or from an explosion off the engine, and residual fire from it. But, again, this is something we're trained for. It's something that we just continue on.
BROWN (voice over): You say you're trained for this, but there are many things that could happen. I mean, from my understanding, some of the parts could have gone through the fuselage. I mean, there's a lot of different scenarios, devastating scenarios that could have played out.
When this initially happened, how is a pilot first alerted to this? How do they first know about it? You have got to wonder about the passengers who look out the window like this one who was filming this video and sees the engine on fire?
GUGGER (voice over): Well, in a case, in today's case, obviously, everybody heard the explosion. So the first indication was that. And then in the cockpit, we have multiple warning systems that tell us when something goes wrong.
BROWN (voice over): Gotcha. All right, Retired Commercial Airline Pilot Jim Gugger, thank you so much for coming on.
GUGGER (voice over): Thank you.
BROWN (on camera): Well, the temperature in Texas has finally gotten above freezing but the crisis is far from over. Millions of people need the most basic lifelines, food, water and medicine. Our Omar Jimenez is standing by in Austin.
Stay with us, you are live in the CNN NEWSROOM.
[20:10:00]
BROWN: And we are continuing to follow breaking news out of Colorado tonight. Take a look at this, debris falling out of the sky near a dog park in Broomfield, about 20 miles outside of Denver. This from a United Airline flight carrying 231 passengers and ten crew members headed to Honolulu from Denver today.
The Boeing 777 experienced engine failure but was able to turn around and land safely. Now, no reports of injuries in the air or on the ground, the debris is reportedly spread out for at least a mile.
And the National Transportation Safety Board has opened an investigation. We will continue to follow this breaking story and bring you the very latest.
Well, last weekend's bitter cold is easing in Texas. Statewide, though, fewer than 50,000 residents are still without power right now. But more the half the state is still under boil water advisories. And as things begin to thaw, broken pipes are becoming the latest headache.
CNN's Omar Jimenez is in Austin where some people are turning to an unexpected source for clean water. Tell me more, Omar.
OMAR JIMENEZ, CNN CORRESPONDENT: That's right, Pamela. Well, over the course of really just the past few days, obviously, water has been a very precious resource that not many people can get. So they've been coming to breweries, like meanwhile a brewery here in Austin where they have water, they have been able to pour into people who have shown up with literally empty jugs just so they can have something at their homes to wash with.
And while the electrical situation has gotten better over the past 48 hours, water is that next frontier with more than 14 million people in Texas remaining with their water disrupted this year.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: The water is not even bubbling --
JIMENEZ (voice over): The he lights may be on, but across parts of Texas, the water isn't, drinking water still needed.
DEBORAH WRIGLEY, HOUSTON RESIDENT: There's a panic mode that we didn't have enough drinking water. We would love showers, but we will get that when we get our water turned back on.
JIMENEZ: Texans waiting in long lines just to pick up cases of water with nearly of half the state under boil water advisories.
MAYOR STEVE ADLER (D-AUSTIN, TX): This is a community of people that are scared and upset and angry. We're eventually going to need some better answers. Right now, we're just trying to get water to our neighbors.
JIMENEZ: But it's not just drinking water. Some residents can't even flush the toilet without melting snow.
SMITA PANDE, AUSTIN, TEXAS RESIDENT: We relocated back to our house, five adults and two dogs, and we started harvesting snow because we had also lost water at that point, harvesting snow for toilet water.
JIMENEZ: That lack of water making it especially difficult for those suffering from kidney failure. Some dialysis clinics have been forced to temporarily close, meaning patients have to go to the hospital to keep their kidneys from shutting down.
[20:15:06]
DR. PAUL NADER, UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS DELL MEDICAL SCHOOL: So we've had double, sometimes triple coverages of physicians at all of the hospitals. We covered many hospitals in Austin.
Ordinarily, we finish most of our dialysis between about 8:00 and 5:00 or 6:00 at night for a regular day. We were working 2:00 or 3:00 in the morning dialyzing patients in the hospital.
JIMENEZ: President Joe Biden approving a major disaster declaration for Texas, freeing up more help from FEMA.
REP. ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ (D-NY): When disaster strikes, this is not just an issue for Texans. This is an issue for our entire country. Disasters don't strike everyone equally. When you already have so many families in the state and across the country that are on the brink, that can't even afford an emergency to begin with, when you have a disaster like this, it can just set people back for years.
JIMENEZ: And as residents wait for the water and power to come back, some still forced to use their cars for warmth. Others, if they're lucky, find shelter in a hotel.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: The guests, frankly, it's been the equivalent of camping indoors.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
JIMENEZ (on camera): Now, moving forward, a lot of the conversation is going to be trying to figure out what went wrong, so catastrophically wrong over this past week.
And one thing Texas officials are now looking at is how electric bills in some parts of the state skyrocketed over the course of this, up to nearly $7,000 in one case at least. But, overall, the good news is that we are not heading into another night of freezing temperatures as we saw every night this week. And the water pressure in Houston seems to be getting under control. And in Austin, I know, we're at least over halfway. Pamela?
BROWN: So things are moving in the right direction but people are still suffering there in Texas. Omar Jimenez, thank you for bringing us the very latest on the ground there.
And if you're looking for ways to help Texans, go to CNN's Impact Your World, that's cnn.com/impact.
And we are following breaking news tonight out of Colorado. A United flight to Honorlulu forced to turn around because of engine failure and then dropped debris along its path.
Coming up, I'll speak to the man who was standing next to a massive piece of the plane that fell right outside of his home.
[20:20:00]
BROWN: And we have been following this breaking news out of Colorado where pieces of a Boeing 777 came blasting out of the sky earlier today. The debris falling from a United flight that took off from Denver bound for Hawaii. Miraculously, there are no reported injuries on the ground or in the air, and the plane was able to make a safe landing back at Denver International Airport.
But this video right here gives an idea of what it was like for people on the ground.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: No, it's -- something blew up.
(END VIDEO CLIP) BROWN: Just imagine if you're standing there and you see that. That video was shot in the neighborhood of Broomfield where authorities say the debris radius extends for at least one mile.
And joining me now is Broomfield resident Kirby Klements. He had an extremely close call this afternoon as debris from that plane rained down on his neighborhood. Kirby, tell us about this narrow escape.
KIRBY KLEMENTS, EYEWITNESS: Yes, it was pretty surprising. My wife and I were sitting inside the house, just finishing up with the paper, and we heard this big bang. And we kind of looked at each other and go, what was that? Then all of a sudden, there was a bang and a crash.
And this object just rolls right in front of our house, right out the front window. So I get out and look outside and I'm trying to figure out what it is. And since I opened the door, I go, uh-oh, it's an engine part.
BROWN: So you knew immediately?
KLEMENTS: So my first was that a plane had gone down.
BROWN: Okay, wow.
KLEMENTS: Yes, I knew immediately what it was, yes.
BROWN: That's impressive. I'm just imagining, you're at your home reading the paper and then you see an engine part go by the window. What was going through your mind?
KLEMENTS: My first thought was that the plane had gone down. So I stepped outside and looked up, and there were pieces of this honeycomb soundproofing insulation that goes around the engine that was just floating through the air like ash from a volcano.
And it probably floated down for a good three or four minutes before it all landed. And that stuff is scattered all over the neighborhood. But, yes, we were very lucky. Ten feet a little closer and it would have gone right through our living room.
BROWN: Well, that's what I was going to say. I mean, we're looking at these remarkable images on the screen. I'm looking down so I can look, and that's where my screen is. But it's just remarkable to think how close it came to falling on your home or falling right on top of you and your wife when you're in there.
So when you walk out, you see this big piece. Tell us, first of all, what was it like to see it in person right there in front of your home, what did it look like? Just describe it for us.
KLEMENTS: It was a little overwhelming, because I knew what it was, but I really didn't piece together why is this here, you know? So I kind of went up to it and touched it a little bit and realized it was really heavy, I mean, really heavy.
[20:25:00] So I went out to talk to my next door neighbor and asked him what he had heard. And we came out and looked. And it was just -- then all of a sudden people started coming out from everywhere who had heard the crash.
So it was probably, I don't know, a little while later when I realized it had actually landed on top of my truck. So it landed and caught the corner of my garage, and then landed square on top of my truck and fell off of my truck.
BROWN: Well, better the truck than you, I think we can safely say.
KLEMENTS: Oh, absolutely.
BROWN: It's just remarkable, we're looking at it right now. Tell us about our damage in your neighborhood. I mean, this happened in your home but you are not alone tonight.
KLEMENTS: No, there's a house behind me and catty-corner, they had a piece of debris, I don't know what kind it was. It actually went through their roof, put about a five-foot hole into their roof. Most of it stayed, from what I understand, up in the attic area, it broke through the ceiling in their kitchen.
I heard one other house may have had some roof damage, but other than that, it's pretty remarkable, because there's a -- down the end of the block from where we're standing behind me, there's a big five-foot section of what I'm guessing to be fuel line pipe that's laying in the street down there. If that would have hit anybody or a car that was driving down the street at the time, somebody could have been seriously hurt from that.
But other than just the pieces of the covering of the airplane and the insulation around it, I haven't really seen any engine parts or heard of any engine parts. Some people say there's a little bit of metal around but I haven't seen that myself.
BROWN: So now all of this, and the debris at your house, is part of an investigation. Have you talked to investigators yet? Have they given you instructions about what to do?
KLEMENTS: The city of Broomfield sent out an alert because the debris, as you've seen, covers a fairly large area. Most of it is between myself and the park, which is just east of us, which is in the direction of DIA. We're about ten miles west of DIA. So the flight path heading to California in that area is right over this area. So the debris field is scattered through there.
But other than the local police and the fire department, there hasn't been any other authorities here yet.
BROWN: But they told you not to touch it, right, not to do anything, right? I imagine they've given you instructions.
KLEMENTS: Right, jet fuel and all that stuff is highly corrosive and not good for you to come in personal contact with. So they've got pretty much a couple of square block area around this neighborhood that's all blocked off, that they're not letting anybody but residents in through. And they've advised everybody not to pick up or disturb the debris.
BROWN: So you're going to be at your house tonight? You're going to stay there?
KLEMENTS: Well, our house was not -- it just knocked the gutter off of my garage, but as far as damage to my house, no. It's not damaged at all. And other than talking to the local police and fire department, there has been no other authorities who have come by and issued any kind of edict or demand or telling us to not do anything or that we had to leave or whatever.
So we're probably waiting -- I don't imagine anybody is going to show up until tomorrow morning. So I hope not, anyway. I don't want them to come here in the middle of the night and try to do that.
BROWN: I don't blame you. You probably want a good night's rest after what you've been dealing with today. But now you're going to go to bed in your house with a big piece of that airplane engine at the front.
KLEMENTS: It's probably going to be a while before the adrenaline slows down and the nerves get back together. So we've had phone calls from friends and everybody from across the nation that we haven't talked to for a while, was that your house? yes, that was us.
BROWN: Well, it's nice that we can smile, right? I mean, we can smile right now because no one was injured, but it was a close call.
KLEMENTS: That's exactly right, because no one was injured either here on the ground or in the plane, it turns into more of an adventure and excitement than a catastrophe.
BROWN: Exactly, yes.
KLEMENTS: And, really, it's just personal damage, a little bit of property damage that was hurt. So I think even the house that had the roof damaged slightly, they should be able to spend the night in there.
It is starting to snow right now, as you can probably see.
BROWN: Listen, I'm going to let you go get warm, I don't want to keep you outside in the cold with the snow and everything. But thank you, Kirby, after the day you've had to come on and share your incredible story with us. What a Saturday for you.
[20:30:01]
Thanks so much.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Well, no problem. No problem. OK.
BROWN: All right, bye-bye.
And now, I want to bring in CNN analyst and former FAA safety inspector, David Soucie joining me now.
So, David, we just saw that huge piece of an engine that smashed Kirby's truck, just so heavy were these pieces that were falling. Put it in perspective what we were just seeing there.
DAVID SOUCIE, CNN SAFETY ANALYST: That piece itself can be more than close to about a ton, about 1,800 pounds or so it's very heavy, very heavy. It's what -- is -- that's -- that part of the engine is what keeps the ice from getting in the engine in building up, hot air is piped into that, and it's filled up and it keeps it full of nice and hot, so that whatever air is coming in there doesn't ice up on the sides and then break off and get into the engine.
BROWN: So, it's clearly an important part of the engine. What can you glean from the terrifying passenger videos allegedly showing the engine failure in real-time you see in the video here?
SOUCIE: Well, there's a lot of information actually from those videos, it's really nice to be able to have those. And as you mentioned before, it's nice to be able to discuss this without the tragedy of deaths or injuries around it. Just incredibly fortunate.
I've done several accident investigations where parts have come off in an aircraft or even just a cube of ice is built up and falling off an aircraft and caused fatalities on the ground, namely, in Chicago that happened at midway airport, that I recall is very difficult. This is really, really amazing that no one was injured because of this.
But if we talk about what's happened to the engine, it appears because where the fire is coming from, there's fire extinguishing mechanisms around the engine.
Because of where the fire is coming from behind that kind of first phase of the engine, it looks to me like it's an intermediate compressor failure of some kind. It's not in the hot turban section, which would be further back, and it's not in the high-pressure area of the turbine compressor, so it's somewhere in that first part.
There's the big fan engine, you can see that turning. It's not turning at a high rate of speed though. It's pretty slow, and it's very shaky, and that's a very well-balanced piece of equipment. So, the fact that it's shaking and moving the way that it is, that big fan, tells me that there's something that failed in that medium compressor pressure -- compressor just behind the main fan.
So, something got in there cause it to fail. It wasn't a bird strike, I can guarantee you that. Something happened that really made this fail. If there is one thing that I've seen similar to this and that it was a bird strike, there were several birds that went into an engine and caused what we call a compressor stall.
And what that is, is that the high-pressure turbine is constantly burning in the back and driving that big fan to push the airplane forward. And so, what can happen is that compressor, if it gets plugged up, it can actually push that power all the way back out through the front of the engine and cause damage to the front of the engine. So that's another possibility I'd be looking at if I was investigating tonight.
BROWN: But you do not think this was a bird strike to be clear.
All right. David Soucie, thank you so much for all of your insight. They're really interesting as we learn more about what happened there with that plane.
Meantime, President Biden is looking for a reset on the world stage. But how will that play at the Kremlin or in Tehran? We're going to take it up with David Sanger up next. You are live in the CNN NEWSROOM.
[20:35:25]
BROWN: Well jailed Russian opposition figure, Alexei Navalny, hit with two court defeats and Moscow today. He'll remain behind bars after a judge partially rejected his appeal of a two and a half year prison sentence, shortening the sentence by just over one month.
The fallout over Navalny's detention in Russia is just one of the foreign policy challenges facing President Biden. And in his first month in office, Biden has already made a clean break from his predecessor on a host of those issues.
In stark contrast to Donald Trump, Biden has rejoined the Paris Climate Accord. He's spoken out on Russia's cyber warfare efforts invited Iran back to the negotiating table, and he's calling for a global effort to combat coronavirus. Biden set the tone for his approach Friday during his first major speech to world leaders.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
JOE BIDEN, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES: I'm sending a clear message to the world, America is back. The Transatlantic Alliance is back, and we are not looking backward. We are looking forward together.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
BROWN: New York Times national security correspondent and CNN national security analyst, David Sanger, joins me now.
So, David, this is a complete 180 from Trump's go it alone approach Biden is essentially saying, hey, we're back, America is back. We're going to work with our allies. But what was so interesting in this article you wrote for the New York Times, it's not like some of America's allies are running into Biden's warm embrace and saying, OK, we're back where we were before, right?
DAVID SANGER, CNN NATIONAL SECURITY ANALYST: Well, that's right, Pamela, and thanks for having me back on. I think what was interesting about this past week is there's obvious relief on the part of the allies that Joe Biden is there. He's somebody they know well, he gave that speech, the random clip from at the Munich Security Conference, something he went to for years as a senator, vice president, even came back as a private citizen running for president two years ago.
So, they are very comfortable with him. But I think their message back was sort of twofold. The first was, don't expect it just because Donald Trump is gone and Joe Biden is in, that we're going to agree with you on everything. And that came particularly from Angela Merkel of Germany, who's got some differences about how to deal with China, and how to deal with Russia.
And the second was that they are all concerned that while Joe Biden is a familiar character, they worry that four years from now, everything that he does, could be reversed as quickly as he is trying to reverse what Donald Trump did.
[20:40:04]
BROWN: And, of course, they've seen that play out with the Iran deal, right? I mean, I want to ask you about Biden's approach with Iran, which he addressed yesterday. Let's listen.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
BIDEN: We're prepared to reengage in negotiations with the P5 plus one on Iran's nuclear program. We must also address Iran's destabilizing activities across the Middle East. And we're going to work in close cooperation with our European and other partners as we proceed.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
BROWN: What has the Biden administration learned from Obama and Trump that could help make progress on the Iranian nuclear issue?
SANGER: Well, I think that what you heard in when he said that we had to address Iran activities across the Middle East, that was cold words for we know that the Iran deal signed in 2015, didn't do everything it needed to do.
So, what they're trying to do is figure out a way to reverse President Trump's action, which, of course, in 2018, he pulled out of the Iran deal, get back into those restrictions so that the Iranians are no longer producing uranium, nuclear fuel at the pace of which they had been in the past year and a half, where they basically broken out of the agreement because the United States did. But they can't just go back into the deal, because it's not long enough, and it's not strong enough.
And so, they need to hold back enough leverage that they force the Iranians to do more. And that's going to be hard panel, in part, because the Iranians have their own presidential election coming up in June. And there's going to be a great temptation in the next few months to show who can take a harder line against Washington and against Joe Biden.
BROWN: All right. David Sanger, thank you for bringing us the very latest, national security correspondent at the New York Times. Thank you so much.
SANGER: Thank you. Great to be with you.
BROWN: Well, after a month of near total silence and mostly staying out of public view, former President Donald Trump is headed back into the political spotlight on the biggest stage he has available. A source confirmed to CNN that Trump will speak next weekend at CPAC, the Conservative Political Action Conference.
But tonight, a source telling me also that former Vice President Mike Pence will not attend. Source telling me and my colleague Jim Acosta that Pence won't be attending, that he plans to stay under the radar for the next six months.
And earlier tonight on this program, Pence's former chief of staff, Marc Short, acknowledged what Trump has that -- what Trump has such a difficult time accepting that Joe Biden won the election barely that the election was not stolen. Here's what he said.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
MARC SHORT, FORMER CHIEF OF STAFF TO VICE PRESIDENT PENCE: I think that we did have concerns about some of the events that happen in a few states like Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, but we accept that Joe Biden is the duly elected president United States. And I think that the process, we just want to make sure -- the vice president wants to make sure the process played out to its conclusion.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
BROWN: Short also tried to downplay the tension between Trump and Pence, after Trump suggested even as the riot was unfolding that the vice president inside the Capitol, that Pence lacked courage.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
SHORT: I think the reality is that the president and vice president met, they've they talked several times before they departed, they departed amicably. The president told the vice president he did a great job for him, and they've spoken since.
And so, look, the reality is that clearly there were differences about what the vice president's role was on January 6th. But I think that in that moment, the vice president was focused in doing his job and staying in his post until it was complete.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
BROWN: But he wouldn't directly answer the question if Pence felt betrayed by Trump. And Short also tells me that Pence saw Capitol Hill rioters from his office. And when he was being evacuated, he saw rioters as well, but he didn't hear those who called for Pence's hanging.
Short says they weren't worried about their safety because they were surrounded by Secret Service agents.
Well, as more Americans get one of the coronavirus vaccines, there is a growing debate whether children should return to in-person schooling. A new study suggests it's safe, but what do teachers think? The president of a national teachers' union, Randi Weingarten, joins me live to discuss.
[20:45:51]
BROWN: We have been following this breaking news out of Colorado tonight. This video posted on social media allegedly showing the engine of a Boeing 777 on fire. The United flight bound for Honolulu from Denver started shedding parts of the plane about 20 miles right outside of Denver in Broomfield this afternoon.
And pieces of that plane here seen falling out of the sky incredibly though the pilots were able to make a safe landing back at Denver International Airport, 241 passengers and 10 crew on board are safe and there are no reported injuries on the ground. The NTSB is investigating. We will keep you up to date with the very latest on this developing story.
Well, President Biden promised that in his first 100 days, he would try to come up with a plan to safely reopen schools. As the country nears the one-year mark of the pandemic, many children have been out of school for almost as long.
Despite this huge push to get schools reopen this week, only about 41 percent of students had a traditional in-person every day schedule. That's according to Burbio, a website that tracks K-12 School re- openings. About 26 percent of students had a mixture of online and in- person learning, and 33 percent are online only.
[20:50:09]
And as teachers push for the vaccine to get more schools back up and running, California announced it will set aside 10 percent of its COVID-19 vaccine doses for teachers and childcare workers in about 28 states and D.C. also allow teachers to get vaccinated right now.
Joining me now is Randi Weingarten, she is the president of the American Federation of Teachers representing 1.7 million members. Randi, thanks for coming on.
RANDI WEINGARTEN, PRESIDENT, AMERICAN FEDERATION OF TEACHERS: Thank you, Pamela, for having me. Really appreciate it. And so good -- glad that nobody was hurt in Colorado.
BROWN: Yes, we are -- we're all very thankful for that for sure.
So, I want to get right to it with what the CDC director said Dr. Rochelle Walensky. This is what she said yesterday about schools and red zones being able to reopen for in-person learning.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
ROCHELLE WALENSKY, CDC DIRECTOR: In the areas that remain red, and they're about two-thirds of districts now with the numbers continue to decline, and the numbers that remain red, we say with universal masking and physical distancing and densification of classrooms, there are opportunities for in-person learning, as well as for middle and high school learning, and assuming you're able to do the densification that we suggest.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WALENSKY: So, as you heard -- just heard there, she's emphasizing that if masks are used, if physical distancing is in place, schools in red zones with high transmission can provide in-person learning. Does your teachers' union support that position?
WEINGARTEN: Yes, we do. Actually, there's, you know, the places that are beyond red, like in -- the purple places, like in LA, you really have to go from purple to red. But what is happening is -- and I give Dr. Walensky a lot of credit, she has put out a safety guardrail that we asked the Trump administration to do months ago.
You know, we basically said, we know teachers know, that in-school instruction is really important for kids. So, we basically said, we need the guidance for how to limit or effectively eliminate transmission and we need the resources.
And the Biden ministration has been a sea change within -- see change, excuse me, within three weeks, they've gotten us guidance that we can use. And then hopefully, we will get this package this rescue bill that he's trying to pass out of the Congress. These are the two elements that are needed, plus, prioritizing teachers for vaccines, like other essential workers, just like we prioritized health care workers, so that we give them --
BROWN: Hold on. I just want to jump in really quick, because I want to get to teachers vaccinated in just a second. But I want to stick on this really quick. So, you're saying you agree with Walensky, but there's so -- there's only 40 percent of schools that are offering, I think it's K-8, the everyday in-person learning. And basically, Walensky just said, look, if you're masking up and you can social distance, you can operate safely, that's something to you -- go ahead.
WEINGARTEN: Actually, what the --what's happening in schools is that if you're doing the social distance, and the dedensification, you pretty much need 30 to 40 percent more space and more educators. And the reason that you have so many places that are in hybrid is because they don't have the space, and they don't have the educators.
So, the real issue right now is, how do we help take the places that are on remote and turn it around. Teachers are still scared. But what they just told us in a recent poll in the last two weeks, is that if we get the testing, the vaccine prioritization, and these mitigation strategies, 85 percent of them are comfortable being in school. So essentially, we can put our money where our mouth is, which is if it's really important to do, we've got a roadmap, let's make it happen.
BROWN: But that's a lot of ifs. And the CDC says the testing and the vaccines are secondary, that they're not a prerequisite to opening up the school safe right now.
And I want to just ask you, because the teachers unions, as you have heard, they received criticism that they are -- some parents have said and other critics have said, the teachers' union are hold -- holding children's education hostage. I just want to give you an opportunity to respond to that criticism.
WEINGARTEN: So, Pamela, let me just say this. First off, all teachers' unions are not monolithic. But my local union, the one I come out from, from New York City, reopen schools with these kind of safety guardrails in September and October, and we learned how important testing was because it was the testing that it's given us this data to know that schools are effectively not transmitting a virus.
We need the guardrails to make it happen. And that's what we've called for months and months and months, including vaccines.
[20:55:19]
BROWN: But there's also the cost factor -- New York has the money, but there's the cost factor, but it's a complicated --
WEINGARTEN: That's why Biden -- that's why -- I'm sorry to interrupt. That's why Biden -- that's why the President is actually calling for the $130 billion or the $130 million for schools as part of the relief package.
But what I'm saying is we're in the middle of a pandemic, and ultimately, do we care about our kids enough? The NFL used all this testing to reopen the NFL, industry is doing the same thing. If we care about our kids enough, let's make sure that we have these guardrails in there. This time, teachers can't widdle.
BROWN: It's a complicated issue. That is for sure.
WEINGARTEN: It's complicated.
BROWN: It's complicated.
Randi Weingarten --
WEINGARTEN: But teachers want to do it. Thank you.
BROWN: Absolutely. They care about the kids. Thank you so much.
WEINGARTEN: They do. They care about them a lot. Thanks.
BROWN: All right. Thanks so much.
Thank you for joining me this evening. And I'm going to see you again tomorrow night starting at 6:00 p.m. Eastern.
Load-Date: February 21, 2021



End of Document


United Flight Suffers Engine Failure After Takeoff In Denver; NTSB Investigating "Engine Event" Of United Flight Near Denver; Rep. Ocasio-Cortez Raises $4 Million For Texas Disaster Relief; Safe Water Now The Biggest Need In Storm-Battered Texas; United Plane Lands Safely After Engine Fails, Parts Fall Onto Neighborhoods; President Biden Visits Bob Dole Following Cancer Diagnosis; COVID Hospitalizations Dip To Lowest Level Since November. Aired 7-8p ET
CNN CNN NEWSROOM 7:00 PM EST
February 20, 2021 Saturday

Copyright 2021 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved 
Section: NEWS; Domestic
Length: 6482 words
Byline: Pamela Brown, Lucy Kafanov, Pete Muntean, Miles O'Brien, Peter Goelz, Omar Jimenez, Natasha Chen, Arlette Saenz, Polo Sandoval
Guests: Tyler Thal, Mike Massimino
Highlight: Airplane debris fell on Denver neighborhoods after takeoff. United flight suffers engine failure after takeoff in Denver. NTSB is investigating "Engine Event" of United flight near Denver. Rep. Ocasio-Cortez (D-NY) raises $4 million for Texas disaster relief. Safe water is now the biggest need in storm-battered Texas.
Body




[19:00:00]
ANNOUNCER: This is CNN breaking news.
PAMELA BROWN, CNN HOST: I'm Pamela Brown in Washington. Welcome to our viewers in the United States and around the world. You are in the CNN NEWSROOM on this Saturday evening, and we're following breaking news tonight out of Colorado. A Boeing 777 with 241 passengers and crew onboard started shedding debris after an engine failure, causing huge pieces of metal to rain down over Broomfield, Colorado just outside of Denver.
The United Airlines flight was headed to Honolulu from Denver International Airport, and then turned around for an emergency landing this afternoon, shortly after taking off. The NTSB has formally launched an investigation into the incident. But it appears a huge tragedy was narrowly avoided. Pilots landed the plane safely with no injuries to anyone on board and there are no known injuries on the ground from the falling debris, which local police say is amazing.
Incredibly, calm in the cockpit even as a United Airlines pilot called air traffic control to report engine failure. We now have that audio of the very moment the pilot issued the mayday call, listen.
(BEGIN AUDIO CLIP)
PILOT: Mayday Mayday United Air28. 328 heavy Mayday Mayday aircraft uh...
ATC: 328 Heavy say again please - repeat all that again.
PILOT: Denver, departure. United 328 Heavy Mayday aircraft just experienced engine failure. Need to turn immediately.
(END AUDIO CLIP)
BROWN: I want to turn now to our Lucy Kafanov; she is at the scene. Lucy, what are you seeing? LUCY KAFANOV, CNN CORRESPONDENT: Well, Pam, it's been a surreal experience being out here. It's a Saturday afternoon, a lot of families were out and about, there's a dog park nearby, so folks were walking their dogs. There's also a massive soccer field where a lot of kids were practicing soccer, when this incident took place several hours ago.
And we're actually standing on one of the streets that's closed off by police tape where some of the debris had fallen on a house, that image that you saw, the round piece of engine or whatever that was is actually right behind the RV there.
But I want to bring in two guests, two young women who were actually practicing soccer on the field when this happened. This is Rylee, who's 16 years old, sorry, 17 years old, and Bella, who's 16 years old. And Bella, you were actually on the field when this happened. Can you describe what you experienced?
ISABELLA RUEDA, EYEWITNESS: Yes, so we were about an hour into practice. We're going to go for like an hour and 30 today, I think. And we were doing a possession drill working on our attacking and defending. And then we kind of just heard like a boom or like a POW kind of like either a gunshot or like firecrackers or fireworks going off, and I actually thought it came from the neighborhood.
So we just kind of kept practicing. But then these guys came over and said a plane exploded and we looked up and you just kind of see these black debris, things falling out of the sky. And it took us a second to really realize what was going on and we kind of just stood there like what are we supposed to do.
And then we were out in the middle of the field, so we had to figure out whether where to go, some girls went to their cars and then there were two pavilions that we could go under. I went to one that was up on the hillside. And so, under there, we just kind of watched the rest of the debris fall down. Some fell into the neighborhood and other pieces on to the field. And yes...
KAFANOV: What was going through your mind when you realized this was a plane? I mean, were you scared?
RUEDA: I was really nervous. I was more like, OK, I don't want to get impaled by anything. So I'm going to run towards that thing that has a big metal roof over it. I drive a jeep and I had this soft top on and I was like, that's probably not the smartest place to be, if anything, so I was just kind of focused on getting there and then see what happened afterwards.
KAFANOV: And Rylee, you had just finished your practice session. So what did you see?
RYLEE CARROLL, EYEWITNESS: So I was just about to leave, and I was in the car with my friend, and we just saw black stuff falling from the sky and we were really confused. And then we saw people like starting to run out to the shelters with bags over their heads. And after like a few minutes of just seeing that stuff, I saw a few people pick up like one of the one of the biggest pieces. I was like, I'm pretty sure that's a plane, so then I kind of figured it out.
KAFANOV: Thank you so much. I mean a terrifying experience and actually picking up those pieces of planes is what the police say you should definitely not do, they are still investigating the area. In fact, Pam, they don't even know how large the debris field is. While we've been out here, people had actually come up to the police to report pieces of debris in their yard, in front of their house and trying to figure out who to report that to.
[19:05:00]
The NTSB is going to be taking over this investigation but right now this is a very active scene, a lot of folks just dazed and confused, and thankfully for the most part, it seems unhurt. Pam?
BROWN: Thankfully, I just can't imagine what it's like for them, trying to enjoy their Saturday out and about, and then suddenly pieces of a plane fall in their front yard. Incredible to hear what some of those eyewitnesses said that you interviewed Lucy, thanks so much.
And CNN aviation correspondent Pete Muntean joins me now. First of all, Pete, what strikes me is that how much debris fell from the ground. Why - I mean fell from the plane to the ground. Why is it that that happened? I mean, it's one thing for an engine to fail and to no longer work, it's another for parts of it to just come off, as you see right here in this video, and land on the ground.
PETE MUNTEAN, CNN AVIATION CORRESPONDENT: In aviation - I'm a pilot and a flight instructor - we use the term losing an engine, when the engine stops producing power. In this instance, the flight crew literally lost the engine, with this debris field a mile long, over Broomfield, Colorado.
That is something that is very rare, just the uniqueness in the - how extreme this was really can't be understated. Engines fail on commercial airliners from time to time. On the grand scheme of successful flights, that's actually pretty rare. But for this to happen in such an extreme way is especially rare.
You can see in that image there, in front of that house between that RV and the house, that looks to me to be the front of the right engine, of this Pratt and Whitney engine on this Boeing 777 jet and it really speaks to the force of that boom those witnesses described.
These are parts of airplanes that are incredibly well engineered, because not only are parts moving around inside in an incredibly fast speed, it also is so critical to getting the airplane in the air - you can't do it without an engine - but it's also very hot. And so these are pieces of aluminum and Kevlar and composite that truly shook off of the airplane and into this massive debris field. It's really quite something and can't be understated how rare this is.
BROWN: Just remarkable visuals here that we're seeing as you're speaking there. Pete Muntean, stay with us. I want to bring in CNN aviation analyst Miles O'Brien and CNN aviation analyst and former NTSB managing director Peter Goelz. Thank you both for coming on. Miles, just put this in perspective for us, if you would, how close were we to witnessing a horrific tragedy today, or was this scenario the result of the training and engineering that's in place specifically to prevent a catastrophe?
MILES O'BRIEN, CNN AVIATION ANALYST: Yes, I like to think about the latter part of it. There is this expression in aviation, the rules are written in blood, aviation progressively and systematically over the years has taken mishaps, events, fatalities, crashes, and turn them into better ways to fly.
And a lot of what we're seeing in the wake of this is a system that did OK. Dramatic as it was, we can't expect jet engines doing what they do at the very edge of our technological capabilities to perform flawlessly all the time, especially when you consider the number of flights that we deal with every day, even in the pandemic world.
Statistically, they're going to fail. And so, the system was built to protect against something really catastrophic happening here. That engine is designed to contain the shrapnel that occurs when there is an uncontained failure, as best it can, and it appears that's what happened here. It didn't pierce the fuselage. Imagine if that had happened.
If it had pierced the fuel tank, and you saw the open flames on the engine there, that could have been catastrophic. And then the separate issue of - imagine if there were kids playing on that soccer field.
So several bullets were dodged here, but in many respects, it's in a calculated way. We can say it's lucky, but it's also a system that rolls up their sleeves and tries to imagine these scenarios and tries to build in layers of redundancy and defense in depth against it.
BROWN: And the pilots are so well trained - training for this from the moment they start is what I'm told from other pilots, Pete Muntean said that as well. So clearly the pilot was so calm in the Mayday call, really remarkable to hear about that. And we're hearing from the residents on the ground too is that debris was falling down, Peter, where the police are saying, look, don't touch the plane debris. This is now part of an investigation.
And the last hour, the department spokeswoman told me that there was about a one mile spread of debris there. So what can NTSB investigators learn from the spread and the positioning of these pieces?
PETER GOELZ, CNN AVIATION ANALYST: Well, there's an old saying that the first piece off the aircraft indicates where the accident occurred. So they're going to be looking at the beginning of the debris field to see what pieces came off this engine first and what they look like.
[19:10:00]
As Miles said, this was - things worked as they were designed. Nothing penetrated the cabin or the aircraft, the pilots were trained to land it. So now the three most important pieces of evidence are going to be the voice recorder, the data recorder and the evidence first off the aircraft. So people really shouldn't be touching this stuff. They want to find where that first piece is.
BROWN: But to be clear, I mean, you're looking at all this debris and everything, do you think that they're going to be able to figure out to get to the bottom of what happened here?
GOELZ: Absolutely. The NTSB - we have we have found cabin doors at 10,000 feet, we have found pieces of fan blades in farming fields, miles from accidents. The NTSB will find the wreckage, they will analyze it, and this one, they'll figure out what happened.
BROWN: So from a pilot's perspective, Miles, try to put us in the shoes of the pilot on this plane. What was happening? I'm sorry, actually, Pete, I'm going to go to you, because I want to get your perspective on this, then Miles, I'll go to you, as - because you're a pilot, Pete, what's going on in the mind of that pilot?
What was going on when the engine failed? This is something you told me before pilots trained for, he was very calm, but how hard is it to land a plane with one engine.
MUNTEAN: It's incredibly hard. It's tricky. Not only have you lost half of the available power here to keep the airplane climbing, but it essentially becomes very hard to maneuver. The dead engine now has essentially turned into a boat anchor, making the airplane hard to turn back to the field, hard to align properly with the runway.
So the physics become very dynamic and it becomes very difficult to fly, running through the scenario, running through the emergency and the problem. That's also especially difficult, especially because of the extreme startle factor that would have been associated with this crash, a loud boom.
So you have to sort of figure out first what that is. And then pilots who drill for emergency engine failures all the time have to start jumping into action and relying on their rote memorization and essentially become emotionless and really tuned into the airplane to make sure they do everything exactly right to get the airplane on the ground right away.
BROWN: It's all the prep they did leading up to that moment that helps in that situation. Very quickly, Miles, what does it tell you that one engine failed and the other didn't?
O'BRIEN: Oh, imagine if we'd had a double failure, that would be - that would take us back to like a Sully incident where you had the geese flying into the engines. Having two engines fail, is such an extremely unusual scenario as maybe a situation involving fuel contamination might be the case, but the fact is they're extremely reliable and the possibility - I don't even want to try to rate the odds on having yet another engine fail subsequent to what you saw here today. That would - you'd be better off playing the lottery and using that as your retirement fund.
BROWN: All right, Miles O'Brien, Peter Goelz, Pete Muntean, thank you so much gentlemen.
And as water systems in Houston and Austin come back online, millions still face food and water crisis following deadly storms right now, as we speak. And you'll hear next from New York Congresswoman AOC, who so far has raised over $4 million for disaster relief.
[19:15:00]
BROWN: Last weekend's bitter cold is easing in Texas, state-wide just over 50,000 residents are still without power. But more than half the state is still under Boil Water Advisories. And as things begin to fall, broken pipes are becoming the latest headache. CNN's Omar Jimenez is in Austin where clean water is the most precious resource.
CNN's Omar Jimenez:
(BEGIN VIDEO TAPE)
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: The waters not even bubbling--
OMAR JIMENEZ, CNN CORRESPONDENT (voice over): The lights may be on, but across parts of Texas, the water isn't. Drinking water, still need it.
DEBORAH WRIGLY, HOUSTON RESIDENT: There's a panic mode that we didn't have enough drinking water. We would love showers but we will - we'll get that when we when we get our water turned back on.
JIMENEZ (voice over): Texans waiting in long lines just to pick up cases of water, with nearly half of the state under Boil Water Advisories.
STEVE ADLER (D), MAYOR OF AUSTIN, TEXAS: This is a community of people that are scared and upset and angry. We're eventually going to need some better answers. But right now, we're just trying to get water to our neighbors.
JIMENEZ (voice over): But it's not just drinking water, some residents can't even flush the toilet without melting snow.
SMITA PANDE, AUSTIN, TEXAS RESIDENT: We relocated back to our house, five adults and two dogs, and we started harvesting snow because we had also lost water, at that point, harvesting snow for toilet water.
JIMENEZ (voice over): That lack of water making it especially difficult for those suffering from kidney failure. Some dialysis clinics have been forced to temporarily close, meaning patients have to go to the hospital to keep their kidneys from shutting down.
DR. PAUL NADER, CHIEF, DIVISION OF NEPHROLOGY, UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS DELL MEDICAL SCHOOL: So we've had double, sometimes triple coverages of physicians at all the hospitals. We cover many hospitals in Austin. Ordinarily, we finish most of our dialysis between about 5 PM or 6 PM at night, for a regular day. We were working 2 AM or 3 AM in the morning, dialyzing patients in the hospital.
JIMENEZ (voice over): President Joe Biden approving a major disaster declaration for Texas, freeing up more help from FEMA.
REP. ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ (D-NY): You know, when disaster strikes, this is not just an issue for Texans, this is an issue for our entire country. Disasters don't strike everyone equally. When you already have so many families in the state and across the country that are on the brink, that can't even afford an emergency to begin with, when you have a disaster like this, it can just set people back for years.
[19:20:00]
JIMENEZ (voice over): And as residents wait for the water and power to come back, some still forced to use their cars for warmth. Others, if they're lucky, find shelter in a hotel.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: The guests, frankly, it's been the equivalent of camping indoors.
(END VIDEO TAPE)
BROWN: And meantime, CNN's Natasha Chen spent the day in Houston, Texas, and she has more on efforts involving New York Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and other Texas lawmakers to bring in much needed disaster relief funds.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
NATASHA CHEN, CNN NATIONAL CORRESPONDENT (on camera): Pamela, by Sunday afternoon, Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez had raised more than $4 million for Texas organizations, including the Houston Food Bank, where she started the day volunteering, along with representatives Sheila Jackson Lee and Sylvia Garcia who represent the Houston area.
She then came to this working-class neighborhood of Houston with Garcia to tour a home where the couple had lost power for days during the worst of this storm. I asked the Congresswoman who's from New York, why she chose to come to Houston to help out and if that had anything to do with a certain colleague of hers?
So, your choice to come to Houston, I mean, what are your thoughts on you coming from out-of-state choosing this city, the home of Ted Cruz, who left--
OCASIO-CORTEZ: Honestly, the big reason I came to Houston is because Sylvia invited me. We started--
REP. SYLVIA GARCIA (D-TX): I said that we had better margaritas at my house than at Cancun.
OCASIO-CORTEZ: It was really Silvia that stepped up and said, we need help with the Houston Food Bank. I've got an extra bedroom in my house, and we could use your help. And so, I just picked up her invitation. CHEN (voice over): The couple that lives here said that they are hauling water from their neighbor's house four or five times a day and that, the wait for a plumber in town could be about two weeks right now. So, they feel very lucky to have a family member who's handy, trying to help them solve these problems more quickly.
As they were giving this tour, they also learned from the members of Congress that they can now start applying for federal assistance available as a result of the major disaster declaration Biden signed. Pamela, back to you.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
BROWN (voice over): Thanks, Natasha. These are new images just in to CNN WOW! Showing the engine failure aboard a Boeing 777 that happened shortly after takeoff. This is in the air, the plane is in the air with the engine on fire. Our experts are standing by, along with an eyewitness on the ground.
[19:25:00]
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
BROWN (voice over): Take a look. These are shocking new images coming in to CNN posted on social media, allegedly of the engine failure of the United Airlines Boeing 777, Boeing rather, 777 that suffered engine failure on takeoff. Back with me now is our CNN aviation analyst Miles O'Brien and CNN aviation analyst and former NTSB Managing Director Peter Goelz.
Peter, as you look at this video, what are you seeing? What does it tell you?
GOELZ: Well, first of all, it's extraordinary. But as I was watching it, it looks like the outer fan blades are rotating and are largely intact, and that the problem occurred further back into the engine in the compressor blades. They have high pressure and low pressure compression chambers and blades. What do you think, Miles?
MILES O'BRIEN, CNN AVIATION ANALYST: Peter, I'm looking at it, and what really strikes me here is, is the flames, frankly. One of the first things you do when this happens is you cut off the fuel to the engine. So, is that residual fuel still burning?
Or was there some problem with the fuel cut off? And that's something that as you know, Peter, the NTSB will be looking at. It's interesting, we often talk about how the wreckage tells the tale. These days, we've got video documentation too.
BROWN: Yes, and I just want to - so the viewers know, when I'm looking down, I'm watching this video. That's where I'm seeing it. So you know why I'm looking down. But, as you look at this, what does it tell you given what we know about the debris that's on the ground? And what we see here? Like, where is this? What part of the process is this, you think?
GOELZ: Well, I think - Miles, go ahead.
O'BRIEN: Oh, well, I mean, obviously, whatever happened has in a significant way has happened here, it's - even though it's bouncing around there like crazy and is scary looking, it's relatively speaking, a stable situation.
Those flames appear to be - I'm going to guess that's residual fuel as a lay person, but this is something that a more trained eye needs to look at. But, this is one of the big concerns when you have one of these uncontained failures, is the shrapnel kit - where's the fuel on an aircraft? Inside the wings. They're called wet wings.
That's where we tanker the fuel. And you don't want shrapnel piercing that wing. You don't want flames coming in proximity to that fuel. So it's a scary moment. And I can only imagine what it's like to - you thought you're off on your way to Honolulu and you look out the window and see that.
BROWN: Yes, I really could not imagine. This apparently was posted by a Twitter user whose parents were on this plane filming this in real time.
[19:30:04]
And you have to wonder the panic that was going on, on the plane, how the crew was managing that and everything. Kudos to the crew as well for landing the plane safely and the fact that there were no injuries. Truly remarkable.
Peter and Miles, thanks. Stick around. Much more to discuss on this.
But first, we want to stick with our breaking news this hour. This frightening in-flight incident today in the skies over Colorado, a commercial airliner raining pieces of its engine onto homes and streets below.
This is one view of the plane from the ground the moment witnesses knew something had gone wrong.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: No, it's -- something blew up.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
BROWN: That video was shot by Tyler Thal in Broomfield, Colorado. Tyler joins me now.
Hi, Tyler.
TYLER THAL, EYEWITNESS: Hello. BROWN: So what was going through your mind when this was happening? And tell us just about that moment where you see it, and then you take out your camera and just start shooting video?
THAL: Well, I just couldn't believe it. We were on a walk with our family, just like any other Saturday and there's a low flying airplane. I looked up.
And as I'm looking at it, I actually see, you know, fire burst out of the plane, an explosion.
So you know, I was kind of in shock at first and then you start thinking, oh my gosh, is this plane going to go down?
So I mentioned it to my family. I didn't know what else to do. I pulled out my camera. I grabbed my phone. I didn't know if I was going to call someone or not or who I'd call, but I took the video.
Once the sound from the exclusion hit, it was very frightening for my daughter. You could hear her on the video. I just didn't know what to do.
BROWN: So tell us about that. So you were with your daughter? How old is she? What was her reaction? What was it like for you as a father in this situation?
THAL: She's in kindergarten, so she is six years old. You know, it's just scary. You know, she is safe, but you know, she's so scared. So you don't know what to tell her. I mean, we just tell her, we're okay, we're going to be okay.
But just looking up at that plane and you know, it just kept going. So it didn't plummet, it just kept going so, at that point I didn't know where it was heading. I'm just hoping all those people on that plane were going to be okay.
BROWN: Yes, I mean you're watching this in real time and you're probably thinking, oh my gosh, where do I go right now? To make sure that a piece of metal doesn't hit me or my family. What was that like and was your suspicions -- at first, were you concerned the whole plane was coming down?
THAL: Well, I absolutely was and you know we're far enough away. I wasn't concerned for our safety necessarily, but knowing the area, I knew that was over Broomfield, and that is just a populated area, you know, the debris I saw on that soccer field, I'd been there with my family.
So you know, I was absolutely concerned for the people on the ground and the people on that plane. And I'm just thankful they all -- they were all okay.
BROWN: Yes, it's really remarkable. I imagine you're talking to others as well who witnessed -- were eyewitnesses to this. What is just the feeling right now in the community? What are you hearing from others?
THAL: Well, it's kind of disbelief.
BROWN: All right, we're having some audio issues there with Tyler, but really, he just laid out how remarkable and scary the situation was there near Broomfield, Colorado when he looked up in the sky, and he saw pieces of metal from a plane coming down to the ground and he captured it on his phone.
Thanks so much to Tyler for coming on.
And up next, President Biden makes a surprise visit to see former Senator Bob Dole as the war hero battles lung cancer. You are live in the CNN NEWSROOM.
[19:38:09]
BROWN: Well, President Biden this afternoon made an unannounced visit to an ailing icon of the Republican Party. His longtime Senate colleague, Bob Dole, the 1996 presidential nominee announced this week that he is battling stage four lung cancer.
Arlette Saenz is at the White House, and Arlette, these two men have a very strong bond, don't they?
ARLETTE SAENZ, CNN WHITE HOUSE CORRESPONDENT: They certainly do, Pamela, and it's a relationship that was forged after serving decades together in the United States Senate.
Now, this visit by President Biden was a surprise stop. It was not announced on his public schedule. But he spent a little bit over an hour today visiting with former Senator Bob Dole over at the Watergate.
Now, Dole earlier this week had announced that he has stage four lung cancer. I want to read that statement to you. He said: "Recently, I was diagnosed with stage four lung cancer. My first treatment will begin Monday. While I certainly have some hurdles ahead, I also know that I join millions of Americans who face significant health challenges of their own."
So the President paying a visit to his longtime friend just a few days after he made this public announcement and as Dole is set to start that treatment for cancer this week.
Now the President was asked by reporters how Senator Dole was doing and he said that he was doing very well, but certainly the President wanted to spend some time with someone who he really developed a close relationship with while he served those years in the Senate.
BROWN: And we shouldn't be surprised that President Biden made this visit as you said, his bipartisan friendships are well known.
SAENZ: Yes, they certainly are. And Senator Dole and Biden when he was a senator, they were obviously on different sides of the aisle, but still developed this relationship and this friendship. I was watching some videos of them from the past few years where they were each speaking about each other and you could hear the respect and the decency that they each thought that they saw in the other person.
[19:40:15]
SAENZ: Now, the President also has many relationships with his old bipartisan colleagues. You'll remember he was very close with Senator John McCain, even delivering a eulogy at one of his memorial services. And a lot of these relationships were also formed on their international trips.
Biden traveled with both Dole and McCain abroad trying to work on foreign policy while they were in the Senate. The President also has many other Republican friends that he is close with who he also works on maintaining those friendships with.
I remember being in an airport with him once where he ran into former Republican Senator Alan Simpson, and the two of them spent some private time together before we all got on the same flight.
And so the President has worked very closely with so many of his Republican colleagues up on the Hill, and he tries to maintain these friendships as you saw today, as he paid a visit to Senator Bob Dole.
BROWN: All right, Arlette Saenz live from the White House. Thanks so much, Arlette.
And despite a massive storm that has interrupted shipments of the COVID vaccine, health officials are making a vaccine push to get Americans vaccinated.
[19:45:52]
BROWN: And we are following breaking news out of Colorado. Take a look. These are stunning pictures of debris from a United flight.
The Boeing 777 took off this afternoon from Denver bound for Honolulu, but then quickly returned after one of its engines failed.
Giant pieces of the airplane came down in Broomfield about 20 miles outside of Denver. And here's audio of the moment the mayday call went out.
(BEGIN AUDIO CLIP)
PLANE: Mayday, Mayday United Air28. Three-twenty-eight heavy Mayday Mayday aircraft.
ATC: Three-twenty-eight Heavy say again please, repeat all that again.
PLANE: Denver departure, United 328 Heavy Mayday aircraft just experienced engine failure. Need to turn immediately.
(END AUDIO CLIP)
BROWN: And the flight landed safely back at Denver International Airport. All 241 people on that flight were safe and miraculously, there have been no reports of injuries from the falling debris.
The N.T.S.B. is now investigating and we will continue to keep you updated on this developing situation.
Meantime, in the fight against the coronavirus, public health officials are pushing large shipments of COVID vaccine this weekend for two reasons. One is to make up for progress lost during this week's winter storms and two, to try and stay ahead of any COVID variants.
Details here from CNN's Polo Sandoval.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
POLO SANDOVAL, CNN CORRESPONDENT (voice over): Just a month after reaching 400,000 confirmed COVID-19 deaths, the U.S. is closing in on half a million people dead from the virus.
Yes, the latest numbers do show a continuing five-week decline in the nation's new cases, as well as the decline in hospitalizations and deaths, but there's a caveat. The C.D.C. warning it is unclear how much of the decrease is due to recent winter weather closing some testing sites, and there is a sharp spike in cases at the University of Maryland, school officials there are ordering all students living on campus to sequester in place until next Saturday.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: And it's pretty much expected when you see that the fact that students are returning back to campus.
SANDOVAL (voice over): Despite the positive signs elsewhere, the Director of the University of Washington's Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation thinks we may not achieve herd immunity until next winter. This despite recent reports suggesting we may get there next month.
DR. CHRIS MURPHY, DIRECTOR OF THE UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON'S INSTITUTE FOR HEALTH METRICS AND EVALUATION: We know COVID is really seasonal, so when the next winter rolls around, we need to have a much higher level of protection to stop COVID in its tracks than we're likely to achieve.
SANDOVAL (voice over): This week, weather-related shipping delays are fueling discussions about whether or not the administering of second doses should be delayed, allowing for more first round shots for Americans. The White House maintains that is still too risky given the data about the vaccines.
Dr. Paul Offit who sits on the F.D.A.'s Advisory Committee told CNN's Jake Tapper yesterday, he agrees.
DR. PAUL OFFIT, F.D.A. ADVISORY COMMITTEE: IT is clear that this is a two-dose vaccine that you're going to have longer, better, more complete immunity with that second dose. And I worry that if people wait a long time for that second dose, I'm not saying like you know that you can't wait say six weeks between dose one and dose two.
But if you're waiting months and months, I think you're going to have this false notion that you're protected when you may well not be.
SANDOVAL (voice over): Many states are getting vaccination efforts back on track and Maryland officials are using a mobile vaccination unit to make up for lost ground.
And in the City of Minneapolis, health officials are making additional efforts such as partnering with local organizations and churches to reach communities hardest hit by the pandemic.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: The best thing I can say to anyone is if it's available, take it and just pray that it works for you and you stay safe.
SANDOVAL (voice over): Along with vaccinations, the U.S. needs to prioritize testing thinks Kathleen Sebelius, she is a former head of Health and Human Services.
KATHLEEN SEBELIUS, FORMER SECRETARY OF HEALTH UNDER OBAMA ADMINISTRATION: Focus on both testing that we need to identify who has the disease and then the serology tests that will tell us more about antibodies and what kind of variant is circulating, but we need both tests and we need them very, very quickly.
SANDOVAL (voice over): Polo Sandoval, CNN, New York.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
[19:50:01]
BROWN: And we are getting some new images from Mars, from the Perseverance rover. Have you seen this? And NASA's mission is one of three on the Red Planet this year. But why is there so much earthly interest? Former NASA astronaut joins us next to explain. Stay with us.
[19:55:00]
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Touchdown confirmed. Perseverance is safely on the surface of Mars, ready to being seeking the signs of past life.
[CHEERING AND APPLAUSE]
(END VIDEO CLIP)
BROWN: NASA's Perseverance rover affectionately called Percy landed on Mars, Thursday, beginning its historic mission for evidence of ancient life on the Red Planet. But already, we are not alone. The UAE and China have orbiters circling Mars with China expected to land there in May. So why the sudden convergence on Mars and what do we hope to learn from these missions?
Here to discuss is former NASA astronaut, Mike Massimino. Mike, good to see you.
MIKE MASSIMINO, FORMER NASA ASTRONAUT: Likewise.
BROWN: First, if you would lay out how significant this is. Explain how this Mars trifecta came about and what the three missions aim to accomplish.
MASSIMINO: Sure, Pamela, thanks for having me. And it's a pretty exciting time. As you mentioned, it's not that the U.S. -- it's not just the U.S., it is other countries as well, all part of Mars 2020. That's when all these spaceships started heading toward Mars, and it is not just coincidence that they all kind of left around the same time and arriving around the same time.
Because our planets are in different orbits, there's only certain times throughout the years where they're close enough that you can get there expeditiously. And so that happens about every year and a half or so.
So three countries, the U.S., the UAE and China, as you said, took advantage of that window we had about six to seven months ago to send their spacecraft to Mars.
And it's pretty exciting because it's not just studying the planet of Mars and learning about how it might have affected the formation of Earth or how Earth and Mars kind of went in two different directions. Is there life there and so on? But also kind of the precursor to sending people there, which hopefully will happen in the next decade or two.
BROWN: Yes, that's the big question. So what you would hope is that these other countries would share the data of what they're also getting. But China has this history of holding back some of its findings. Could that create setbacks in terms of synthesizing this data and planning, future missions, planning for humans to go there?
MASSIMINO: No, I don't know. I think, you know, most countries, we cooperate with, of course, on the International Space Station, and the science communities usually cooperate pretty well and share information.
So I don't know how that all is going to work out with, you know with all the countries, but you know, certainly I think that what we're going to learn from the U.S. mission from Perseverance is going to be a huge help, learning how to convert the atmosphere into breathable oxygen, looking for signs of water, looking for signs of ancient life.
Ten years down the road, they're looking toward returning a sample from the rover back to Earth to study. So with all of that coming back, and the great pictures that are coming and the helicopter that is going to be flying around and they're even recording sound on the planet now on Mars, I think there's going to be a lot of science, a lot of information to keep a lot of people active for quite a while.
BROWN: So what is that already telling you? What you're hearing and seeing in these pictures, what's already being collected by Percy, what is all of this telling you about Mars?
MASSIMINO: Well, the hope is that it will find some signs of ancient life from billions of years ago. They picked a very interesting place to land. This is a dry lake bed, but it used to be the size of Lake Tahoe. And now it's dried up, you know, we are talking billions of years ago, it was it that. Now, it's dried up.
So they wanted to go there because they think there may be some very interesting things to find maybe on the surface or just underneath the surface when it looks for maybe signs of microbial life, signs of water, where we can maybe use that in the future.
But in order to get there, they needed a lot of artificial intelligence and autonomy to land in that very interesting place because it was a hard place to land, but they pulled that off, and I think now that engineering miracles have taken place to get the spacecraft there, I think the science will begin in earnest.
But we're going to find out a lot. Hopefully we'll find out the things that we're hopeful about like signs of life and water and so on. But we will have to wait and see a little bit.
BROWN: We are going to have to exercise some patience. One of the rover's experiments will be attempting to convert carbon dioxide into oxygen, which could be necessary for manned missions.
If that technology works, could it also have applications here on Earth? Say to reduce carbon in the atmosphere?
MASSIMINO: Absolutely, Pamela. Go into space, everything we did with the space shuttle, with the space station, and still what we're doing, exploring Mars, it is not just about going other places, it's about helping life on Earth.
So we need water when we go to space, we've been able to find out more about how to purify water, reuse water, recycle water on the space station, we're going to be using similar techniques if we can find water on Mars. Same for being able to purify air as well.
So yes, absolutely. I'm glad you brought that up. Going to places like Mars is not just about going there, it's about making life better on Earth, and that's really what our space program is all about.
BROWN: All right, Mike, thanks for laying it all out for us. We really appreciate it.
MASSIMINO: You bet, Pamela. Thanks for having me.
[20:00:11]
Load-Date: February 21, 2021



End of Document


Millions Face Water, Food Crisis in Texas After Deadly Storms; Biden Approves Major Disaster Declaration for Texas; White House Fails To Provide Clarity On School Reopenings, Teacher Vaccinations; NY Gov. Cuomo Under Fire Over Nursing Home Data; Pennsylvania Officer Accused Of Obstructing Police During Capitol Attack; Nine Alleged Associates Of Oath Keepers Charged In Conspiracy To Attack Capitol; Bad Weather Delays Shipment Of Roughly Six Million Vaccine Doses. Aired 3-4p ET
CNN CNN NEWSROOM 3:00 PM EST
February 20, 2021 Saturday

Copyright 2021 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved 
Section: NEWS; Domestic
Length: 6695 words
Byline: Erica Hill, Omar Jimenez, Priscilla Alvarez, Arlette Saenz, Brian Todd, Jennifer Rodgers, Errol Louis, Katelyn Polantz, Celine Gounder, Delia Gallagher
Guests: Arne Duncan
Highlight: It's been a deadly crisis in the state of Texas, with at least 26 dead so far, and even as temperatures are finally moving up, the devastation for residents is far from over. President Biden approved a major disaster declaration for the entire state of Texas. President Biden's goal is to have kids and teachers back within his first 100 days in office, but the plan to make that happen is far from clear.
Body




[15:00:01]
FREDRICKA WHITFIELD, CNN HOST: All right. So we're now also getting to see far away what Mars looks like in full color. NASA's "Perseverance" rover has sent back photos in stunning detail of the Martian surface all from about 293 million miles away. The rover landed Thursday in the area where evidence of water had previously been found, and the main goal of this mission is to find signs that life existed there billions of years ago.
All right. Thank you so much for being with me today. I hope you join us again tomorrow.
I'm Fredricka Whitfield. The CNN NEWSROOM continues right now with Erica Hill.
(MUSIC)
ERICA HILL, CNN HOST: Good Saturday afternoon. You're live in the CNN NEWSROOM. I'm Erica Hill, in for Ana Cabrera in New York.
We begin this hour with a deadly crisis in the state of Texas. At least 26 dead so far, but that toll is expected to rise. And even as temperatures are finally moving up, the devastation for residents there is far from over.
People in several areas of Texas and surrounding states have no running water. In fact, many, as you can see here, waiting in line to get drinking water after the pipes burst deep freeze. Significant number of families staring down major repairs but a long recovery.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
JENN STUDEBAKER, AUSTIN, TEXAS RESIDENT: So this is kind of what we're now doing. The water is not even bubbling, nothing. This is -- this is snow we melted for washing faces and hands.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
HILL: And breaking this morning, there is federal relief on the way. President Biden approving a major disaster declaration for the entire state of Texas.
CNN's Omar Jimenez is in Austin right now.
So, Omar, what's the latest there in Austin?
OMAR JIMENEZ, CNN CORRESPONDENT: Yeah, so right now, what the real priority is water for a lot of people. On the electricity front, thankfully, they actually have outages under 10,000 for the first time after peaking at more than 200,000, and so, that is good news.
But again, on the water front, we have seen more than 14 million people across Texas have their water disrupted as a result of in week, leaving people like here in Austin, to come to places like this brewery where they would come over and have their water bottles filled just like this so that they could have actual water for themselves at their home.
We're under a boil water advisory in Austin. And right now, the prognosis is they're a little bit more than halfway at getting the water pressure at a level to where they can distribute citywide.
Now, I want to talk to the two owners here at this brewery helping people fill up on water over the course of really this week.
So, now, tell me about what this week has been like and what you guys have been doing, and how much water have you been able to give out to people?
NAO OHDERA, OWNER, MEANWHILE BREWING: We started this Thursday morning when we found out like a majority of the city lost power Wednesday night and so, you know, I lost power -- water at my house. So, we were like we have two tanks full of filtered good drinkable water. So we were, like, you know, we could use it to make beer. But right now, people need water. So, that's how we decided to give it out.
We started giving water out on Thursday morning. And have given out about 4,000 gallons the past two days. Then we ran out yesterday. But we got the water back on luckily last night. So this morning right away, I came in and started boiling more so we can give out more today.
JIMENEZ: And talking to people that would normally be customers but are now people in need, what have -- what have people been saying to you about, you know, what you've been able to provide?
WILL JAQUISS, OWNER, MEANWHILE BREWING: People have been incredibly grateful. And we're happy to do this. This has just been an awful week for everybody. And we're trying to do what we can to help.
And when -- the water situation got very real for people on Thursday night and Wednesday night, sorry Wednesday night, we decided Thursday morning to give water to people as much as we could. And we've had hospitals, nursing homes, you know, all sorts of organizations reach out, because, yeah, just people are pretty desperate.
JIMENEZ: Yeah, and, look, I mean, you guys have had a steady stream of people coming in over the course of the day to get their water filled up. And I mean one of the things we have seen is this process, not just here in Austin but in Houston they've gotten water pressure right about to where their normal levels are. But in Austin as I mentioned we're a little bit more than halfway.
How long are you prepared to do this here at your brewery?
OHDERA: We'll keep doing it as much as we can and as much as our equipment will allow us. And, you know, as long as we have flowing and people need water, we'll try to do this as much as possible.
JIMENEZ: Thank you guys, so much. We appreciate the work you're doing. I know so many people in Austin are appreciative as well.
The city of Austin has also said they've gotten a little more than 10,000 cases of water coming into the city as part of a steady flow that we're expecting, at least from what we've heard from city officials here.
[15:05:09]
So, again, that next frontier is what is going to help Texans get out of the week that was an awful week, where in many cases people were fighting for their own lives inside their homes.
HILL: Yes, certainly, it certainly was awful. That's for sure. Omar, appreciate it. Thank you.
President Biden as I mentioned signed a major disaster declaration for Texas. That will unlock more federal resources. He says he also plans to head to Texas as soon as his visit is not a, quote, burden on the state overwhelmed resources.
CNN's Priscilla Alvarez is in Washington. White House correspondent Arlette Saenz is there at the White House.
Priscilla, I want to begin with you.
Just give as you sense of how this major disaster declaration will help the state of Texas. What will it change?
PRISCILLA ALVAREZ, CNN REPORTER: This is a significant development for the residents of Texas, because now they're going to be able to receive more individual assistance. So here's what FEMA says about what the assistance will include. It will be grants for temporary housing and home repairs, as well as loans for uninsured property losses and other programs.
So bottom line, this really will help Texas residents get up back on their feet after a very devastating week there. Now, Texas Governor Greg Abbott has already remarked on this, a major disaster declaration saying that it is an important first step and that the state is going to continue to work with federal partners as it has over the course of the week.
Again, FEMA has been on the ground providing water, generators, blankets, meals and now, they'll be able to step in even more and give assistance to the individuals who need it.
HILL: So, that's one aspect of it.
As we look at the impact of this winter storm, Arlette, we know it's had a significant impact on vaccination efforts as well. President Biden visiting Pfizer's plant in Michigan yesterday. Did he address that? How did that go?
ARLETTE SAENZ, CNN WHITE HOUSE CORRESPONDENT: Well, Erica, President Biden traveled to Michigan not just to promote his $1.9 trillion COVID relief package but also to sell the safety and efficacy of the vaccine. The White House has acknowledged that there have been some setbacks for vaccine distribution due to those severe winter storms.
They are encouraging states to expand their hours for appointments so people can get in there to get those vaccines. They are also shipping out much more vaccine than is typically normal, sending out just also this week's shipment but also next week's shipment as well.
But one other challenge that is facing the Biden administration in this moment comes to school reopenings. The president has avowed that he will have schools reopened within the first 100 days. There have been questions about what kind of target that would be.
But yesterday in Michigan the president spoke to some of the things that need to happen for niece schools to reopen safely. Take a listen.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
JOE BIDEN, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES: We know certain things are necessary. Social distancing, smaller class sizes, ventilation, testing. And the possibility that staff, whether it's the staff taking care of the sanitary conditions in the school or simply you heard me say this before, bus drivers, to open the schools, we need more buses and bus drivers. We can't put kids packed in a bus sitting next to one another.
So, we know the things that have to be done. The question is the order in which we do them is going to determined on what moves the quickest and where the need is the greatest. Obviously we still have to focus on first responders. Our doctors, our nurses, those delivering the services.
But the reason I bother to bore with you that detail is to try to explain to the American people that this is a process.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
SAENZ: So the president saying there, there are still a lot of issues that need to be worked out. And one big concern for many people is vaccinations for those teachers. The White House had a bit of confusing messaging over the course of the past week. Ultimately, they are saying that they side with those CDC guidelines that say teachers should be a priority for vaccinations but they don't necessarily need to have those vaccinations in order for schools to restart. But these are certainly questions that the Biden administration will continue to face as they are trying to meet the 100-day goal for reopening schools.
HILL: Arlette Saenz, Priscilla Alvarez, thank you both.
Well, as we stay on the topic of schools for a moment, we know that safely reopening schools is a priority for the Biden administration. You'll recall, Biden's goal to have kids and teachers back within his first 100 days in office. The plan, though, to make that happen at this point is frankly far from clear.
Former Education Secretary Arne Duncan joining me now. He served under President Obama and, of course, then Vice President Joe Biden.
Good to have you with us.
You know, the one thing that seems consistent, there is a desire, a real desire as we know to reopen schools. But the administration's messaging on how to do that has been somewhat inconsistent.
So, I'm just curious, when you listen to what you hear in terms of guidance from the administration in the CDC, are you getting a clear message, clear guidance at this point?
[15:10:08]
ARNE DUNCAN, FORMER EDUCATION SECRETARY: It is getting extremely clear to me, and I listened and I got myself (ph) spent lots of time talking to superintendents across the country, from Boston to San Antonio to Broward County to here in Chicago. And what I'm hearing from actual school districts seems to be verified by what the CDC is saying is that schools, because they are controlled environments, and when there is strict adherence to safety guidelines, the schools absolutely can open safely.
And that's happening across the country as we speak. They have -- they have to open slowly and carefully, starting with the youngest children first and the children with special needs are the most vulnerable. But we need to get our kids back in school and that is happening and happening successfully all across the country as we speak.
HILL: So, to your point, you know, you're speaking with superintendents across the country. I mean, I see it where I live. My kids go to public school. Our districts versus maybe a district in a town next door, two towns over, the way things are being handled is very different, which plays into questions of not only funding but also the resources in terms of staffing that different districts have.
Do you think there has been enough discussion about, yes, there may be guidelines that can sort of be one-size-fits all. We talk about smaller class sizes, and more physical distance and universal mask wearing.
But the reality is they can't be implemented in the same way at every school across the country. Are we addressing that enough? DUNCAN: Well, I think you're re hitting on a really important point. We have 15,000 school districts, more importantly, 100,000 school buildings. And how we open them, that's going to vary school by school, again, elementary versus middle versus high school.
But I think the broad parameters are clear. And there is a desperate need to get children back in not just academically. I'm really worried about tens of millions of kids being six months, ten months a year behind. But I'm actually more worried, quite honestly, about the students' social and emotional health.
And we have to really get students in a much better shape before we go back to school this fall. And so, the conversation can't just be about reopening schools carefully and thoughtfully now. But how do we use the summer months much more creatively to help students learn, to help them grow, to help them play and just be kids and to help them heal, quite frankly?
HILL: When we look at that, when we look at the emotional piece of this, and I have to say, as a parent, I think like most parents we are all watching this in real time and seeing how our kids deal with things differently.
How do you address that over the summer? It's not -- I mean, I think most parents agree it's not another Zoom class. It is not something that happens on the Internet, but it happens with real, physical interaction.
DUNCAN: Yeah, I think we're all Zoomed out. So, we would all agree on that one.
But again, where we can open school buildings, have students come in for academic tutoring, but it can't just be the academic part. You have drama, arts, sports, music, chess, robotics, debate, year book, all those extracurriculars that basically disappeared this year, that's what keeps kids excited. That's their peer group, that's their friends. Let's incorporate all of that.
So, let's do again the academic piece, but also, let's do the social and emotional piece, let kids play. Let them pursue their passions and interests. And we have to start the school year this fall in a much better place than where we are now.
If we have tens of millions of kids starting the school year six months, nine months, 12 months behind, they may never catch up. We cannot afford to have a lost generation.
HILL: As -- we certainly can't. I think pretty much every parent would agree with you and even adults who obviously don't have children know -- know the importance there.
Getting schools reopened is not just about the children as we know. It's about the adults who work in these schools, the teachers and the staff. So, 28 states and the District of Columbia have said that, you know, teachers are eligible for now for the vaccine. How much do you think it would change where we're at -- and even perhaps change the conversation if that entire map that we're showing you now was filled out, if all 50 states and D.C. said teachers and school staff should be eligible at this point for the vaccine?
DUNCAN: Yeah, so teachers, bus drivers, custodians, lunch room attendants should absolutely be at the top of the list for getting the vaccine now. We should do that as fast as we can with tremendous urgency. Having said that, again the CDC has been extraordinarily clear that schools can open safely for everyone, for children, for their families, for the adults, for the staff, for the teachers when all those vaccines aren't yet in place.
So, these two things can happen concurrently, need to happen concurrently and actually are happening concurrently again in many places across the country.
HILL: You know, other thing I want to ask you about before we let you go -- and we talk about the social and emotional wellbeing of children and adults. But as we head back to school, there has been a significant rise in hate crimes against Asian-Americans since the start of the pandemic. There has been a massive spike in the numbers just here in New York City we have seen according to the NYPD.
[15:15:00]
How much should that be a concern and a consideration as schools reopen that this is something to look out for? And this is something to be aware of and so that it can be addressed if it does arise?
DUNCAN: That's a great question, Erica. This has been just a traumatic year. And I think we as adults, frankly, don't even begin to understand the psychological toll, the impact this year has taken for our children. We as adults have never been through anything like this in our lifetimes, hopefully, we never will again.
So, going through the pandemic being separated from their friends, being isolated, that the murder of George Floyd, you know, all the hate rhetoric that former President Trump pushed and the attack on Asian-Americans, we have to listen very, very carefully to our students' fears, to what they are concerned about, to what's going on in their homes, in the broader community.
And we always have to push very hard academically. But we have to take care -- to your point -- we have to take care of our children's social and emotional needs first. That's the building blocks, that's the foundation upon which all the great work we need to do academically is built. And without that foundation, we're kidding ourselves.
So, we have to absolutely be attuned to all the different stresses and trauma that our children have been through this year. It's been too much. It's been way too much.
HILL: Yeah, I think that's something everyone can agree on. Far too much.
Arne Duncan, good to have you with us, as always. Thank you.
DUNCAN: Thank you. Have a great day.
HILL: You too.
New York Governor Cuomo facing allegations his administration covered up COVID deaths in nursing homes. He calls that a lie. But he does say he should have done one thing differently. That's next.
You're live in the CNN NEWSROOM.
[15:20:50]
HILL: As outrage grows over allegations that New York Governor Andrew Cuomo and his administration covered up the true scope of COVID deaths in nursing homes, the governor is now blaming in part misinformation, saying he didn't confront the misinformation aggressively enough.
Well, this as calls ramp up for a full investigation into Cuomo's handling of the cries. And it also comes amid allegations of political intimidation by the governor.
CNN's Brian Todd as more.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
BRIAN TODD, CNN CORRESPONDENT (voice-over): Andrew's Cuomo's latest political battle has gotten intensely personal with new accusations of intimidation against the New York governor.
MAYOR BILL DE BLASIO (D), NEW YORK CITY: That's classic Andrew Cuomo. A lot of people in New York state have received those phone calls. You know, the bullying is nothing new. The threats, the belittling, the demand that someone change their statement right that moment, many, many times I've heard that. And I know a lot of other people in the state have heard that.
TODD: The comments to MSNBC by New York Mayor Bill de Blasio who has had a longstanding contentious relationship with Governor Cuomo referred to a call Cuomo made recently to New York State Assemblyman Ron Kim. Kim who criticized Cuomo over a controversy involving nursing home deaths from COVID says Cuomo threatened to destroy his career.
RON KIM (D), NEW YORK STATE ASSEMBLY: Berating, yelling and threatening that I have to issue a statement to -- that invalidated what I heard. He asked me to lie to cover up for his staff. And this was done in front of my family. He called me -- my wife -was next - right next to me. I was, you know, about to bathe with my kids. And it really put, you know, my family and my wife into shock and trauma.
TODD: Cuomo's office tells CNN Kim is lying about the conversation, that there was never a threat to destroy anyone.
Cuomo and his aides say Kim's accusations stem from their history. GOV. ANDREW CUOMO (D), NEW YORK: I've had -- my office more than me has had a long and hostile relationship with Assemblyman Ron Kim.
TODD: This New York style political brawl stems from backlash Cuomo was getting over his handling of the pandemic. A law enforcement official tells CNN, the U.S. Attorney's Office in Brooklyn and the FBI are looking at the handling of data surrounding COVID-19 deaths in long-term care facilities in New York.
This comes after a top aide to Governor Cuomo admitted that his administration delayed the release of the nursing home information, because they were concerned the Trump administration would turn it into a political football. It's not clear whether federal investigators are looking at Cuomo himself. Cuomo's solves says it is cooperating with the Justice Department and Cuomo addressed the crisis this week.
CUOMO: These decisions are not political decisions. They're all made on the best information the medical professionals have at the time.
TODD: A far cry from dark early days of America's battle with coronavirus, when Cuomo was looked on as a true national leader.
CUOMO: You guys need a hand?
TODD: At a time few others were. One analyst says Cuomo still enjoys high favorability ratings for handling of the pandemic but --
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: This is certainly among the biggest crisis -- political crisis that the governor faced since he came into office, if not the biggest. You know, the difference here is the attention that he's getting.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
TODD (on camera): Asked by CNN to comment on Mayor de Blasio's remark that he's bully, Governor Cuomo's office didn't respond specifically but did send us an email calling Assemblyman Ron Kim, quote, unscrupulous.
Meanwhile, some New York lawmakers are calling for Cuomo to be stripped of his expanded emergency powers.
And in Washington some Republican senators are calling on the Senate Judiciary Committee to investigate the nursing home controversy.
Brian Todd, CNN, Washington.
HILL: Joining me now, CNN political commentator and political anchor at New York 1, Errol Louis and CNN legal analyst and former federal prosecutor, Jennifer Rodgers.
Great to see you both this afternoon.
So, Jen, you penned this op-ed for CNN this week, arguing Governor Cuomo and his administration's handling of the nursing home deaths really calls for a serious investigation. Tell us why.
[15:25:00]
JENNIFER RODGERS, CNN POLITICAL ANALYST: Well, for a variety of reasons. I mean, you have a situation where there are allegations that the governor and his top health officials withheld information from the state legislature. So, that warrants investigations in the state.
Then you have the part that, you know, apparently there was a federal investigation going on through the Department of Justice. And the question is, what did he do with that investigation? Was he also withholding information from the Department of Justice? If so, the feds want to get interested in that. And in fact, since I wrote the op-ed, of course, a bunch of information has been learned that there are such investigations going on.
HILL: As we look at where we're at, Governor Cuomo, Errol, has blamed this in part on federal policy, some early concerns about hospitals being overwhelmed in terms of the policies that were in New York state. He says there are issues with misinformation. But in a lot of ways he is saying I would still make the decisions. We turned out -- in a lot of ways New York state did really well.
There was a point, though, that these policies as I understand it, Errol, could have been changed and a little bit earlier on. Can you just -- I mean, set the scene for us again? Bring us back to like, how we got to this point?
ERROL LOUIS, CNN POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: We go to this point. It's March, Erica, we have a crisis on our hands. We have credible sources like McKenzie, the consulting firm like Columbia University, the school of public health, saying that New York state needed 140,000 hospital beds in a state where we only have 53,000 hospital beds.
And so, in the course of dealing with the emergency, one of the orders that came from the Cuomo administration was instructing people, instructing nursing homes in particular that if the hospital bed is freed up, if somebody is well enough, even if they've had COVID-19, if they're well enough that they can leave they've got to leave, they got to free up the hospital bed, they got to go back to the nursing home.
It was controversial at the time, as it turned out we didn't need nearly that many. I think we topped out at 20,000 hospital beds needed at any one time at the height of the pandemic. But nevertheless that was the order.
Now, by the time it was rescinded in may you've got about six to eight weeks during which the policy was in effect. And that's what the fight is all about.
Should those people have been sent back to nursing homes? Could it have been avoided? And most importantly, at this point, why didn't the state simply fess up and give up the information about what was happening so that people could make better decisions about their loved ones and about -- about state policy? HILL: And that's something that we -- we're not getting much of a clear answer to. I'm interested as we look at the push of what's happening here in New York state.
We know there is a bipartisan push to strip him of emergency powers as Brian Todd mentioned. Democrats, you know, really very vocal about that as well, including one state senator who was on with us on CNN earlier today.
The other thing, though, as we look at this, is, okay, let's say those emergency powers are stripped. Jennifer, so what toes that actually change? Does governor actually need the emergency powers at this point in the pandemic?
RODGERS: Well, he might. I mean, the benefit of emergency powers is the ability to act quickly. Legislatures don't move that quickly. You have to draft bills. They have to get together, they go through committee, they have to negotiate and debate.
The governor can move much more quickly with executive orders and the emergency powers gives him the ability to do that. You know, where we are in the pandemic, things seem to be getting better. But certainly if I were Governor Cuomo I would be arguing -- and I think many people even in the legislature agree with this -- that he still needs the ability to move quickly if necessary when it comes to emergency powers.
So I'm not sure at the end that even the people who are furious with him about this nursing home situation are going to strip him of those powers right now, until we're really out of the woods.
HILL: When we look at what has a lot of people frustrated, certainly if you talk to New Yorkers and you read some of the reaction from New Yorkers online, is I think too really when we pull back the curtain and you see how the sausage is made in this. And politically it's not pretty, Errol, and it raises a lot of questions.
As I mentioned, a New York state senator was on CNN just a short time ago with my colleague Fredricka Whitfield. And here's some of what she had to say.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
ALESSANDRA BIAGGI (D), NEW YORK STATE SENATOR: It's not acceptable to withhold information, number one, from the Department of Justice for any political reasons. I think the thing that's perhaps the most controversial is the fact that his top aide, Melissa DeRosa, was in a closed door meeting with legislatures and said that the reason we didn't share those numbers is because we didn't know how it would be used against us an administration. That is incredibly troubling to hear. Why? Because 15,000 lives were lost.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
HILL: It's true, Errol. I mean, that's not sitting well be understandably. LOUIS: And it shouldn't. It really shouldn't, Erica.
I mean, look the standard that people have the right to expect of their government is that they are going to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. They'll let the chips fall where they may.
[15:30:03]
And if the Trump administration, which is entirely credible, wanted to make political hay and make a spectacle out of criticizing the New York governor, they were going to do that anyway, whether you give them information or not.
So give them the information they're asking for and move on to something important like saving lives.
As it turned out the Trump administration did criticize Cuomo. It turned out the Republican establishment did go offer Cuomo. And it turned out that they lost at the polls anyway.
So it was kind of all for nothing, which adds an extra range of tragedy to this, you know.
And then, of course, the real victims here are families. Families who had loved ones in nursing homes didn't know what was going on and had had to make agonizing decisions.
Do you take them out and try to bring them home? Is this nursing home a site of danger? Should I leave my grandmother? Should I leave my parents there?
They had to do it without the kind of information they needed and they deserve to have. That's the real tragedy here.
HILL: Errol Louis, Senator Biaggi, thank you for joining us. Certainly not the last time we will be discussing for sure. Thank you.
LOUIS: Thank you.
HILL: Up next, more charges filed following the Capitol Hill riot, including charges against a Pennsylvania police officer.
Stay with us. You're live in the CNN NEWSROOM.
[15:35:39]
HILL: A Pennsylvania law enforcement officer is now facing several charges for his alleged role in the January 6th insurrection at the nation's capitol.
And 55-year-old Joseph Fischer is a member of the North Cornwall Township Police Department, just outside of Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. According to federal prosecutors, Fischer posted video of himself online showing his alleged brawls with U.S. capitol police officers trying to defend the building.
Joining me now, CNN crime and justice reporter, Katelyn Polantz.
Kaitlan, what are you learning about Officer Fischer's arrest?
KATELYN POLANTZ, CNN CRIME & JUSTICE REPORTER: Right. So this is a police officer who is charged in the situation of obstructing law enforcement, obstructing other police inside the capitol.
We have seen other police that have been charged related to the riot, for taking part in the riot who had come to Washington to support President Trump.
In one is a little bit different, although, there are things about it that are quite similar to what we have seen in the way the investigators have gathered evidence.
In this, the prosecutors gathered video from Facebook that he had posted and then taken down. In the video, it showed a group of people pushing towards a police officer line inside the capitol, someone yelling, "charge."
And then they also were able to see Joseph Fischer's messages over Facebook, which said, "The FBI may arrest you, LOL." And that he had no regrets.
We could probably see him in court this week. And we are not sure what the Justice Department will want to do, whether they want to keep him detained, and what a judge would do in that case. But that is coming up this week, we expect.
HILL: We'll be watching for that.
Meantime, nine alleged associates of the right-wing Oath Keepers group have also been charged in a conspiracy to attack the capitol. What do we know about those charges?
POLANTZ: We've known for a while that there were leaders among the Oath Keepers, the group of nine, that had been coordinating. They had been charged previously with conspiracy.
Now the federal investigators are adding six new people to that saying there were nine in total who coordinated, talked beforehand, talked about doing manipulator training, or paramilitary training. Talked about coming to Washington, met up the morning of the riot.
And then what we see in the court documents and also in some publicly available video out there is that there are images of these people who are -- have patches on their uniforms saying Oath Keepers.
That they are marching together as part of the crowd in paramilitary gear, body armor, helmets. And they have hands on top of one another. It's called a stack formation. It helps them cut through the crowd and plow into the capitol.
That's what we see in these charges this week. We do expect to learn much more about them as well.
We think we'll see at least one of the Oath Keepers in court on Tuesday for a hearing. And the others are just being brought in following their arrests and their charges in North Carolina, Florida, Ohio -- Erica?
HILL: All right. Katelyn with the latest for us. Katelyn, thank you.
Just ahead, the severe winter weather causing delays in vaccine shipments and deliveries. All of this, of course, during a critical period. We are really in this race to get as many people as possible vaccinated. Our medical experts discuss the impact next.
Stay with us. You're live in the CNN NEWSROOM.
[15:43:00]
HILL: The race to get Americans vaccinated hit a huge speed bump this week. A series of winter storms not only knocking out power but deep snow and ice also helping to cause shipping delays.
Delays for roughly six million doses of the coronavirus vaccine from Texas to New England. Bad weather forcing the closure of many vaccine sites.
So what happens now?
CNN Medical Analyst, Dr. Celine Gounder is with us. She is an infectious disease specialist and also served on the Biden/Harris transition COVID-19 advisory board.
Good to see you this afternoon.
Give us a sense how serious of a setback mass the weather been this week.
DR. CELINE GOUNDER, CNN MEDICAL ANALYST: Erica, I do think we made significant progress over the last month or two in terms of scaling up vaccination. And I think it's really important to recognize that.
About 60 million Americans across the country have received at least one shot. About 40 million have received only one shot, 60 million have received one or two shots.
So that's really tremendous progress towards this goal of getting 100 million shots in arms by 100 days.
I think big picture, this is a minor setback. We have lost, yes, about a week's time where we could have been continuing to scale up vaccination. But I think we'll make up for that soon.
HILL: You don't think it's a big deal, it sounds like?
GOUNDER: I think it's a setback. But I think that if you look at the numbers we're still hitting an average of 1.5 million Americans vaccinated per day across the country. And we're continuing to scale that up.
So I think we're continuing to remain on trend with massive increase in vaccine supply predicted, come later this spring and in the early summer.
HILL: We've heard a lot of different dates -- by dates, I mean months, really -- that have been thrown out there in terms of when vaccines will be readily available for -- essentially for all Americans.
So the latest being that there should be, let's see, triple the number of COVID doses on hand by May, according to the CDC, and enough to fully vaccinate the population by July.
[15:45:05]
So this is the latest one. Does that sound reasonable to you in terms of timeline? Can we bank on that one?
GOUNDER: Just with the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines, the Biden administration contracted with Pfizer and Moderna to receive a total of 600 million doses by the end of June.
And 600 million doses with, divide by two because that's two-dose vaccine. That's 30 oh million that we could vaccinate with the supply which, by the end of June.
That's the vast majority of people. We have 3,030 million American people.
Even without the Johnson & Johnson and Novavax vaccines coming online, we should have enough by the end of July for every American people who want to get vaccinated.
HILL: That's the key, the people who want to be vaccinated. We know that's one hurdle.
But another issue, if we're looking at the popular and we're talking about herd immunity, which we talk a lot about, and how important the vaccinations are getting to that point.
The reality is there are a lot of kids in this country. And they figure into the population. They are not getting vaccinated right now.
So how could that impact this goal of herd immunity, and even the timelines that we are seeing?
GOUNDER: That's a really important point, because the clinical trials on children are being -- they're enrolling these kids now. So we won't really have any data until at least the fall on the safety and efficacy of the vaccines in kids. I think of this a bit like a car where you don't want to take your foot off the brake until you had a chance though put the car in park and turn off the ignition.
And so we -- in terms of keeping your foot on the brake, that means we need to continue the masking, the social distancing, the non- -- avoiding non-essential travel until enough people have been vaccinated.
It's once you get to that point where enough people have been vaccinated that you are putting that car into park and turning off the ignition.
HILL: I love a good analogy, especially involving a car. I like that one. I can picture it well.
There's been so much talk about, do you really need both doses of the vaccine? Shall we just vaccinate as many people as possible, as we know.
And this week, the new study out of Israel, looking at a single dose of Pfizer vaccine, 85 percent effective. Dr. Fauci says you should stick with the two doses.
Just walk us through this here. Because 85 percent effective is still remarkable.
GOUNDER: I have to say, you know, my own bias is I do agree with Dr. Fauci on this one. But this is a -- to be fair, being very hotly debated among the experts. I don't think there's clear consensus.
But the way I think about is with one -- this expression, an apple a day keeps the doctor away. And with one dose, let's say you get 10 apples with two doses, you get 100 apples.
The challenge is, even with 10 apple i's enough for the regular strain of the virus. But with the mutant strains it may not be enough. It is for now.
But what we're seeing is a diminution, a reduction in the effectiveness of these vaccines against the variants. So you really want to get that 100 apples a day to protect you against the variants that are continuing to mutate right now.
HILL: To get as much protection as you can.
Dr. Celine Gounder, always appreciate it. Thank you.
GOUNDER: Thanks.
HILL: Just ahead, a decree from the Vatican makes it clear where the Holy See lies on COVID-19 vaccine. That's next.
[15:53:08] HILL: The Vatican is taking Pope Francis's pro-vaccine stance very seriously in a message to employees: Don't refuse the COVID vaccine.
CNN's Delia Gallagher explains.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
DELIA GALLAGHER, CNN VATICAN CORRESPONDENT: The Vatican has told its employee, if they don't get vaccinated for COVID-19, they risk losing their jobs.
The decree from the governor of the Vatican City State, Cardinal Giuseppe Bertello, calls vaccinations a responsible decision. And says that those employees who refuse without a legitimate health reason may be transferred or have their contract terminated.
Pope Francis is a big proponent of vaccinations for COVID-19. He himself has been vaccinated. And he has called it an ethical choice.
The Vatican with about 4,500 employees. And they began vaccinations for employees and their families on January 13th.
Since the beginning of the pandemic, the Vatican has reported 27 cases of coronavirus. Most of those occurred amongst the Swiss Guard, who live together in barracks inside the Vatican walls.
Delia Gallagher, CNN, Rome.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
HILL: On this week's new episode of CNN's original series, "STANLEY TUCCI SEARCHING FOR ITALY," it's a search for the perfect pasta.
Here's a preview.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
STANLEY TUCCI, CNN HOST, "STANLEY TUCCI SEARCHING FOR ITALY": All right, so he's spreading out the leaves.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: (SPEAKING FOREIGN LANGUAGE)
TUCCI: Look at how beautiful that is.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Salad?
TUCCI: Salad.
(CROSSTALK)
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: (SPEAKING FOREIGN LANGUAGE)
TUCCI: That's the best one I've had. It's delicious.
[15:55:03]
(voice-over): It's so addictive. It's like eating candy. You just can't stop.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
HILL: Your chance to experience Rome like never before on the new CNN original series, "STANLEY TUCCI SEARCHING FOR ITALY," that's tomorrow night, 9:00 Eastern, right here on CNN.
Up next, water systems in Houston and Austin are coming back online. Boil-water advisories, though, remain in place for many residents. We're going to take you live to Texas for an update, next.
Stay with us. You're live in the CNN NEWSROOM.
Load-Date: February 20, 2021



End of Document


Biden Declares "America Is Back," Pledges $4 Billion Toward Global COVID-19 Vaccine Aid; Water Disruptions For More Than Half Of Texas; Vaccine Doses Backlogged Due To Weather; French President Emmanuel Macron Urges E.U. To Allocate Doses To World's Poorest Countries; Pro-Democracy Protesters Honor Woman Killed By Myanmar Police. Aired 3-3:30a ET
CNN CNN NEWSROOM 3:00 AM EST
February 20, 2021 Saturday

Copyright 2021 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved 
Section: NEWS; International
Length: 3484 words
Byline: Michael Holmes, Omar Jimenez, Nic Robertson, Alexandra Field, Salma Abdelaziz, Paula Hancocks
Highlight: Power is back for most Texans but the frigid weather crisis is far from over, with the state's biggest issue now being access to clean drinking water. U.S. President Joe Biden is leaving no doubt America first is the foreign policy of the past and not the present, and also pledged to help in the global fight against COVID-19. The White House says the severe weather this week created a backlog of six million coronavirus vaccine doses and extra shipments have been sent out to help things get back on track.
Body




[03:00:00]
(MUSIC PLAYING)
MICHAEL HOLMES, CNN ANCHOR (voice-over): Hello, welcome to our viewers from all around the world, I am Michael Holmes, appreciate your company. Coming up on CNN NEWSROOM.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
JENN STUDEBAKER, AUSTIN, TEXAS, RESIDENT: It's like, I would just keep going and going. This whole year, just keep going. If we just make it one more month.
HOLMES (voice-over): The deepening crisis in Texas. From COVID, to the crippling winter storm, Texas is pushed to the brink.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
HOLMES (voice-over): Also, America is back. President Joe Biden, reaffirming his commitment to allies and undoing his predecessor's agenda.
Plus, three weeks of demonstrations in Myanmar, defiant protesters playing tribute to a young woman, who died, after being shot by police. We'll have a live report.
(MUSIC PLAYING)
HOLMES: We begin with new developments on the Texas crisis kicked by severe winter weather. At least 26 people there have now died. Power has been restored for most, as the state, once again, experiences freezing temperatures.
It could still strain the water system even further. Disruptions are already impacting nearly 15 million people, over half of the state's population. And that is sending many in search of clean drinking water, wherever they can find it.
Now the water shortages are being driven by frozen bursting pipes and treatment plants that lost power. "The Wall Street Journal," reporting, it could all amount to $18 billion worth of damage. That is similar to the toll from a major hurricane.
President Joe Biden saying he plans to visit Texas next week, if he can do so, without creating a burden for the state. He also is set to sign a major disaster declaration to free up more aid.
Texans, meanwhile, still coming to grips with this week's events. Omar Jimenez has more now, on what people are going through.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
OMAR JIMENEZ, CNN CORRESPONDENT (voice-over): So you never even used your fireplace before this?
STUDEBAKER: Oh, no.
Jenn Studebaker and her family, in Austin, Texas, were burning chairs, pieces of bookshelves, before eventually scavenging for bits of wood without even a means to cut it.
STUDEBAKER: That hammer, actually is what we were splitting wood with.
JIMENEZ: Using their nearly abandoned fireplace now as a means of survival.
GRAYSON CRUISE, HIGH SCHOOL SENIOR: We would bring the head of a futon bed and put it right here. So --
STUDEBAKER: Get closer to the heat.
CRUISE: And get closer to the heat. And I would sleep right here. So we would all just kind of be huddling together.
JIMENEZ: Restless from the new mentality they've now had to adopt.
STUDEBAKER: Everyone's just, you know, thinking like we just make one more day, just get one more day. And it's like, well, what if it happens again tomorrow? Now we got to -- OK, we can't burn all of this.
JIMENEZ: And even though the powers on,
STUDEBAKER: No waters, not even bubbling, nothing.
JIMENEZ: The water isn't. And it's not just Austin, as they are among the millions across Texas under a boil water advisory.
In Houston, miles of long lines to pick up water at mass distribution sites.
GOV. GREG ABBOTT (R-TX): I talked to the President last night and he called to let me know that he was going to go ahead and approve the major disaster declaration that Texas would be submitting.
JIMENEZ: In San Antonio, this apartment complex burned to the ground as firefighters struggled to get enough water to fight it. UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Our main concern is water supply. All these hydrants out here is dry. There's (INAUDIBLE) just frozen. There's no water.
JIMENEZ: Even members of Congress forced to get creative.
REP. SYLVIA GARCIA (D-TX): I'm going to fill my toilet with water so that I can be ready for later today.
JIMENEZ: Without water and her Houston home Congresswoman Sylvia Garcia collected rainwater to flush your toilet.
And hospitals are struggling to care for an influx of patients amid an ongoing pandemic.
DR. ROBERT SALDANA, MEDICAL DIRECTOR EMERGENCY MEDICINE, HOUSTON METHODIST HOSPITAL: As more of our area hospitals were without power and water, many of their patients ended up at our facilities.
CHIEF CANDE FLORES, ABLIENE FIRE DEPARTMENT: Earlier today we had a situation where an elderly female walked out of her home and she was found in her backyard deceased. And that was directly related to the weather conditions.
JIMENEZ: Emergencies merging and leaving those already affected by the pandemic wondering where to go next.
STUDEBAKER: I lost half my income. And then finally we're getting here. What am I going to do? I mean, we can barely live here.
Sorry. It's like it just keep going and going and just this whole year, just keep going. And if we just make it one more month, then my tax return will come in or we get some funding. I can't pay my utility bills.
[03:05:00]
STUDEBAKER: So let us just have this tiny apartment. Please. Maybe some water. That would be nice to.
JIMENEZ: And water is that next frontier. It's still expected to be a multiday process but officials, at least here in Austin, are optimistic that they can get it restored by the end of the weekend.
Now on the electricity front, we are still seeing outages across the state but we're in a much better place than we were days ago. The good news, overall, is that Friday night was supposed to be the last night of freezing temperatures that we would see this week, giving Texans, this weekend, the chance to play offense for a change -- Omar Jimenez, CNN, Austin, Texas.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
(WEATHER REPORT)
HOLMES: Now U.S. President Joe Biden emphatically assuring allies, America is back. He told the G7 and the Munich Security Conference on Friday that the U.S. will engage with Europe and defend democracy around the world.
The meetings were held virtually because of the pandemic, which, was, itself, a main topic of discussion. CNN's Nic Robinson with more from London.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
NIC ROBERTSON, CNN INTERNATIONAL DIPLOMATIC EDITOR: The big headline from the G7 commitment to get COVID vaccines to the poorer nations, to speed the development and deployment of the vaccines, to increase manufacturing capacity of vaccines and to share more information about the variants of COVID-19 that can potentially be more deadly, more infectious.
That was a priority, committing more money so that those vaccines could get to those poorer nations, $7.5 billion committed. President Biden came with his own money as well.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
BIDEN: We must cooperate if we're going to defeat COVID-19 everywhere. My first presidential mass security memorandum focused on surging health and humanitarian responses to defeat COVID-19 and to better prevent and prepare for the next pandemic.
Today, I'm announcing that the United States is making a 2 billion dollar pledge to COVAX with the promise of an initial $2 billion to urge others to step up as well.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
ROBERTSON: And the G7 is not the only event of the day. The Munich Security Conference virtual as well. President Biden speaking there, talking about an inflection point in history, where you can go with democracies or you can go with autocracies.
He says he wants to work with other democratic nations to develop diplomatic plans to work together and hold China to account, to hold Russia to account.
[03:10:00]
ROBERTSON: He said the United States is back on the world stage, wants to earn its place back in a leadership role, welcomed by Boris Johnson.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
BORIS JOHNSON, U.K. PRIME MINISTER: As you've seen and heard earlier, America is unreservedly back as the leader of the free world. That is fantastic. And it is vital for our American friends to know that their allies on the side of the Atlantic are willing and able to share the risks and the burdens of addressing the world's toughest problems.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
ROBERTSON: Angela Merkel also offering support, saying it's important to get a joint transatlantic plan of how to deal with China, how to deal with Russia.
Emmanuel Macron, the French president, said, we agree on all the shared interests and values. Sometimes the priorities might be a bit different, he said. But we can work together.
That is the very clear message emerging at the end of the Munich Security Conference. The message also for President Biden is not all European nations are perhaps going to go along with him as easily as perhaps he would like, specifically on China and Russia, too. So not plain sailing.
But the United States, President Joe Biden, back on the world stage, leading, as he wants to -- Nic Robertson, CNN, London.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
HOLMES: President Biden, also reiterating the U.S. is willing to resume talks with Iran on a nuclear deal. That is a significant move toward ending a stalemate between the nations.
The U.S. has condemned Iran for reaching uranium beyond what was allowed under the 2015 nuclear deal. Former president Trump, of course, pulling out of that deal and imposed sanctions on Iran. Biden officials say, talks, at this point, are just in the early stages of planning.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
JAKE SULLIVAN, U.S. NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISER: One of our concerns right now is that Iran is presently threatening to move even further out of compliance, to refuse to cooperate with the International Atomic Energy Agency and the work it is trying to do to ensure nothing in Iran's program is being used for weapons purposes.
So I think the first order of business here would be for the Iranians to take the decision to stop the process of moving further out of compliance.
And then I do believe that there is a diplomatic pathway to getting to an ultimate agreement in which we can all have confidence that Iran's nuclear program has a lid on it, the kind of lid that was on it when we were actually all in the joint comprehensive plan of action together.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
HOLMES: On Thursday, the Biden administration said it is reversing the efforts by the Trump administration to reimpose U.N. sanctions on Iran. Iran says it wants the U.S. to lift all sanctions imposed by the previous administration.
Now the U.S. has officially rejoined the Paris climate accord. President Biden signing an executive order, beginning that process on his first day in office. And it took effect on Friday. Biden's special envoy for climate, John Kerry, says the hard work is just beginning.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
JOHN KERRY, U.S. SPECIAL PRESIDENTIAL ENVOY FOR CLIMATE: We got to be really honest with each other. We have to be humble and most of all we have to be ambitious. We have to be honest that, as a global community, we are not close to where we need to be.
We have to be humble, because we know, the United States was inexcusably absent for four years. And most of all, we have to be ambitious, all of us, because we have to get the job done.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
HOLMES: "We have to be ambitious."
That has also been President Biden's approach to delivering COVID-19 vaccines. Unfortunately, that brutal winter weather we were talking about in the U.S., derailing his efforts. We have details coming up.
Also, we will look at the state of the pandemic outside of the U.S. and why some countries are extending lockdowns, even though their numbers are looking much better.
You are watching CNN NEWSROOM. We'll be right back.
(MUSIC PLAYING)
[03:15:00]
(MUSIC PLAYING)
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
BIDEN: Just over four weeks ago, America had no real plan to vaccinate most of the country. My predecessor, as my mother would say, God love him, failed to order enough vaccines, failed to mobilize the effort to administer the shots, failed to set up vaccine centers. That changed the moment we took office.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
HOLMES: That was President Biden, of course, touting what he says his administration is doing to fight the pandemic. But now Mother Nature, getting in the way. The White House says brutal winter weather has delayed vaccine deliveries and forced vaccination sites to close. CNN's Alexandra Field reports.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
ALEXANDRA FIELD, CNN CORRESPONDENT (voice-over): All 50 states, now feeling the impact of the deadly winter storm, 6 million vaccine doses, now delayed. Shipments of more than 700,000 shots to California alone, still not arriving, creating a ripple effect and leaving people who need shots, waiting.
GOV. GAVIN NEWSOM (D-CA): We're working with provider network, complicated 1,100-plus providers in the state, a lot of increase -- a lot of calls, a lot of stress.
MICHELE ROBERTS, ACTING ASSISTANT. HEALTH SECRETARY, WASHINGTON STATE: We estimate more than 90 percent of this week's allocation will arrive late because of the weather out east. FIELD: Weather derailing every part of the process from vaccine manufacturing sites to distribution hubs, power outages across the country affecting as many as 13 vaccination sites. Until the power is back, they can't get new supplies.
But 1.4 million doses are final on the move again today. Health officials say UPS and FedEx will make Saturday and Sunday deliveries this week and they're tasking states with making up for lost time next week.
GOV. JOHN BEL EDWARDS (D-LA): It appears that next week we're going to be trying to double up.
DR. MARC BOOM, PRESIDENT AND CEO, HOUSTON METHODIST: It will be a little slower than usual. But we'll catch up.
FIELD: The delays coming just as so many states across the country were starting to close the gap between doses received and shots in arms. 37 states now say they've administered more than 75 percent of what they've received. Four states are over 90 percent.
GOV. ANDY BESHEAR (D-KY): We've now got over 200 vaccine distribution sites. We're ready for more. We have been told to expect a significant increase.
FIELD: The latest estimates suggest the U.S. is in for a big increase in vaccines. If Pfizer and Moderna are able to provide what they've promised in the next three months, the U.S. should have three times as many shots on hand. New study suggests even a single dose of the Pfizer vaccine could be highly effective, but Dr. Anthony Fauci says just one is just too risky.
DR. ANTHONY FAUCI, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF ALLERGY AND INFECTIOUS DISEASES: The reason is even though you can get a fair degree of, quote, protection after a single dose, it clearly is not durable.
FIELD: Also on the vaccine front, Dr. Anthony Fauci is saying we should have data on vaccine safety on high school age students, perhaps, by the fall or around the time school starts.
Data concerning even younger students, elementary school age students, unlikely to arrive before the first quarter of 2022. Certainly, something so many families are anxious for -- in New York, Alexandra Field, CNN.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
HOLMES: Wales is extending its COVID lockdown. The first minister says the lockdown is in place since December will last another 3 weeks. But some measures would be relaxed.
Germany, also being cautious about easing its lockdown measures. The health minister says the virus variant first discovered in the U.K. has been found in one out of every five people testing positive.
And, on the vaccine front, French president Emmanuel Macron is now urging E.U. members to put 4 percent to 5 percent of their supply to developing countries. CNN's Salma Abdelaziz, standing by, in London.
Yes, European vaccinations underway.
[03:20:00]
HOLMES: But there are very important, vital, really, efforts to ensure that the world's poorest get a vaccine as well.
SALMA ABDELAZIZ, CNN PRODUCER: Absolutely, Michael. As these nations are struggling to deal with variants of COVID-19, they're looking ahead. You hear that phrase over and over again, no point in one country being vaccinated, if the whole world isn't. We are not safe if the entire world is not vaccinated.
In that vein, you see European leaders taking these steps to ensure that the vaccine is distributed. Yesterday, prime minister Johnson, of course, hosting the virtual G7, starting by saying, the U.K. will give its surplus vaccines to any developing nations.
Now the U.K. ordered 3 times as many doses as needed for their population. So expect there, there could be millions of doses that will be distributed. We don't have a timeline on when it would happen.
And we also have French president, Emmanuel Macron, also calling on countries, calling on the U.S. and the E.U., to pledge up to 5 percent, if not more, of their vaccine supply to developing nations.
You also have an E.U. wide effort. There is a doubling of the contribution of the E.U. to the COVAX initiative. That is the initiative driven to get these vaccines to the developing countries.
Money which can be spent for vaccinations, to get the vaccines into these countries, as well as surplus vaccines and doses, to get to these countries. But we are talking about a huge disparity here.
You have 130 countries, so far, in the world, that have not administered one single dose of the vaccine. When you talk about a vaccination program globally, it is not global, Michael; 75 percent of those doses that have been administered are only in the 10 wealthiest countries.
If you ask experts, if you ask others, they will probably tell you, no. More needs to be done to ensure these vaccinations get to these countries that need it most. HOLMES: The wealthy countries will suffer, if the poorer countries are raging with infection. It comes back around. Salma Abdelaziz, great to see you, good reporting, thank you.
We are going to take a quick break, when we come back, motivated and defiant in Myanmar. Why they are still turning out in the streets in massive numbers, despite the fear of unrest.
(MUSIC PLAYING)
(MUSIC PLAYING)
HOLMES: Opposition leader Alexei Navalny has appeared in court again today. This is new video that is just coming into us. The Putin critic is in Moscow city court, appealing converting his suspended sentence to actual jail time from an embezzlement case from 2014.
Navalny's lawyer asking the judge to allow video recording of the session. She is also asking for Navalny to be released from the pretrial detention center, where he is being held.
The judge says she will rule on that request when making her final decision in the case. Navalny's defamation case, over comments regarding a World War II veteran, will also be heard today.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
HOLMES (voice-over): Those are protesters in Myanmar, chanting, "We need democracy," and demanding the release of the civilian leader, Aung San Suu Kyi. The country, now entering the third week of massive street demonstrations against the military coup.
They are also paying tribute to the young woman who died 10 days after she was shot in the head by police.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
[03:25:00]
HOLMES: CNN's Paula Hancocks, joining me now from Seoul.
That young woman being remembered by the protesters, she has become quite a figure, hasn't she?
PAULA HANCOCKS, CNN CORRESPONDENT: She has, Michael. She's become a symbol of the pro-democracy movement. In fact, she has, for the past 10 days, as she's been in critical condition. Then, on Friday, the family confirming that Mya Thwe Thwe Khaing, a 20-year-old woman had, in fact, succumbed to her injuries.
I spoke to 2 doctors who had been looking after her, just earlier today and they both said that she did not regain consciousness at anytime. That as soon as she arrived, really, it was too late to try and save her. Also saying, it was a live bullet, which had killed her. We have been hearing from the police, that they said at this protest, back on February 9th, they had been using anti-riot equipment only.
So certainly, there is anger on the streets. They have had the first casualty of this pro-democracy movement. Reuters spoke to her sister, who was there, when her sister was shot. She has been calling for people to come onto the streets and to keep going until there is a victory.
Really, this is something that many people we've been speaking to, on the ground, have said that they feel like this is the last battle. They can't give up this time, because they feel, if they lose this battle, they will be under a military dictatorship for good.
So there is a real sense that it keeps going, but there, is of course, a lot of concern from those on the streets. Michael?
HOLMES: Paula Hancocks, appreciate it. Thank you so much in Seoul.
I want to show you what Mars looks like in full, living color. NASA's Perseverance rover has sent back these stunning photos of the Martian surface. You know, only 16 million kilometers away.
Look at the detail. It looks like it could be part of a desert here on Earth. The rover landed on the Red Planet on Thursday, in that area that is marked there.
The main goal?
To find signs of ancient life. The mission, supposed to last one Mars year, at least. When I say Mars year, that is 687 Earth days, to be precise.
I am Michael Holmes, appreciate spending part of your day with me, follow me on Twitter and Instagram, @HolmesCNN. Robyn Curnow will be on in 30 minutes, meanwhile, "AFRICAN VOICES CHANGEMAKERS," up next.
Load-Date: February 20, 2021



End of Document


Millions Face Water, Food Crisis In Texas After Deadly Storms; El Paso's Power Grid Weathered The Deadly Storm; Reports Of Airplane Debris In Neighborhoods Outside Of Denver; Eyewitness Describes Engine Parts Falling From Sky; Broomfield P.D. Spokeswoman Gives Press Conference. Aired 4-5p ET
CNN CNN NEWSROOM 4:00 PM EST
February 20, 2021 Saturday

Copyright 2021 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved 
Section: NEWS; Domestic
Length: 7569 words
Byline: Erica Hill, Omar Jimenez, Dianne Gallagher, Pete Muntean, Mary Schiavo
Guests: Bill Richardson, Kieran Cain
Highlight: It's a deadly crisis in the state of Texas, with at least 26 dead so far, and even as temperatures are finally moving up, the devastation for residents is far from over. El Paso, Texas managed to avoid the widespread power outage that put most of the state in the dark and the cold last week. There have been reports of airplane debris in several neighborhoods outside of Denver.
Body




[16:00:18]
ERICA HILL, CNN HOST: Good afternoon. You are live in the CNN NEWSROOM. I'm Erica Hill, in for Ana Cabrera in New York.
Millions of people in the winter storm battered state of Texas are finally getting a break from the elements, although they still are dealing with a different and desperate problem. They're dealing with a lack of basic utilities. Electrical power starting to come back online, this after millions of people spent days and nights in the dark, frigid cold.
Many homes across the state still without running water. People waiting in long lines to get drinking water. That's because their water either hasn't yet been restored by local officials or because their pipes burst when the temperatures dropped this week.
The White House approving a major disaster declaration for the state of Texas today and New York Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez is actually in Texas after raising millions of dollars to aid people affected by the brutal storms.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
REP. ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ (D-NY): This is not just an issue for Texans. This is an issue for our entire country. Disasters don't strike everyone equally, when you have already have so many families in the state and across the country that are on the brink, that can't even afford an emergency to begin with. If you are documented, undocumented, no matter your income, no matter your housing status, you can get help here.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
HILL: CNN's Omar Jimenez is in Austin.
So, Omar, half the people in Texas, more than 14 million people were told still need water or under a boil water advisory right now. How are folks getting by?
OMAR JIMENEZ, CNN CORRESPONDENT: That's right, Erica. Water is really the focus over the course of this weekend as maybe electricity was the focus early on. We're at a brewery in Austin and what you see behind me is they're finishing up filling up this water tank that the Austin fire department is going to use to go around to locations that actually need water.
And so they have been a huge help with basically what they've been doing is they had water on their own. They've been helping boil water and not just the fire department but others have been able to sort of come around this corner.
And there's been a steady stream over the course of the day, but not any at the moment. They've been able to come here and fill up water bottles and tanks to take back to their homes because as you mentioned, we're under a boil water advisory. Not every place has running waters to begin with. As Texans trying to dig themselves out of the catastrophic week that was and it was not just here in Austin but places across Texas.
In Houston, for example, they've gotten their water pressure back to where they would like it to have a healthy system, but when you talk to the Houston mayor, Sylvester Turner, he wants more answers like so many others as to how this happened in the first place so they can prevent it from happening again.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
MAYOR SYLVESTER TURNER (D), HOUSTON, TX: For anybody that attempts to blame what happened this week in Texas on renewables, then totally, totally disingenuous. What is important to bear in mind is that the climate is getting warmer and we have to address the issue of climate change even in the state of Texas. Anybody who contends that what happened this week was due to renewable energy, they're trying to deflect where the real responsibility lies.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
JIMENEZ: Now, President Biden has approved the major disaster declaration for many counties in the state of Texas which means that people are going to be able to provide for individual assistance from the federal government. Now, the governor, Greg Abbott, here in Texas, thanks the president for that. However, he said it was a little short of what he wanted. He was hoping to get it for all 249 counties in Texas.
The emergency declaration, the major disaster one, covers 77 counties but largely, encompassing those areas that were hardest hit over the course of this. But again, when you talk about the water that needs to be restored, best case scenario, some places looking at the end of the weekend but that seemed to be the next major hurdle to get people back to some sense of normalcy, at least from what they were before this past week.
HILL: Yeah, absolutely. Boy, what a week it has been.
Omar Jimenez live in Austin for us, thank you.
People in one major city in Texas managed to avoid the widespread power outage that put most of the state in the dark and the cold last week. The lights in El Paso actually stayed on. Why?
Here's CNN's Dianne Gallagher.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
DIANNE GALLAGHER, CNN NATIONAL CORRESPONDENT (voice-over): No power, no water. It's been the same story across the state of Texas this week. Well, most of it.
RALPH LOYA, EL PASO RESIDENT: They're freezing in San Antonio, Dallas, Austin, Fort Worth, the Rio Grande Valley, we're very, very lucky.
GALLAGHER: The reason the lights never really went out in a major way here in El Paso is a bit more complicated, and rooted in experience.
LOYA: We had gas shortages, water shortages, power outages.
GALLAGHER: Ralph Loya, like everyone else in El Paso, can't forget the 2011 deep freeze.
LOYA: It was a catastrophe to hit the city that we were not prepared for.
GALLAGHER: El Paso Electric Company, senior vice president of operations Steve Buraczyk was in the control room, 10 years ago, this month, when it all came crashing down.
STEVEN BURACZYK, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT OF OPERATIONS, EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY: We actually had over 3 days where the temperature in El Paso never got above freezing. We lost most of our local units. Those impacts lasted for weeks, and weeks, after.
So, we made that decision that we're going to harden our assets, that we're going to invest in new technology, and invest a new infrastructure.
GALLAGHER: The winterize plant that manager Albert Montano is showing us around today exists, in part, because of the big freeze.
ALBERT MONTANO, PROJECT ENGINEER, EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY: We're designed for running in the summer. But there's a few times where we have an overnight low, and we really need all of the systems up and ready. Our team was able to do that.
BURACZYK: It's a lot easier with a brand-new plant, because now we designed it for minus 10. You have the top technology, state-of-the- art, so you can dine in redundant systems.
GALLAGHER: And built-in redundancies that needed to be tapped in this week, when natural gas supply drop.
MONTANO: It's a diesel operation of the first few units this week, and that is when we started seeing issues with gas pipeline pressure.
GALLAGHER: But another reason El Paso isn't in the dark? It's located so far from other Lone Star cities that it's not on the same power grid as 90 percent of the rest of Texas. There are three power grids in the country, Western, that's where El Paso is on, Eastern, and Texas, the only state to have its own grid, in part to avoid certain federal regulations.
This week, the Texas system, which is operated by the Electric Reliability Council of Texas, or ERCOT, failed, and has faced accusations of being unprepared for the storm.
GOV. GREG ABBOTT (R), TEXAS: I am taking responsibility for the current status of ERCOT. Again, I find what's happened unacceptable.
GALLAGHER: Planning for a once in a decade storm is expensive, but it is possible, and worth it, says El Paso Electric, if it prevents disasters like what we're seeing in Texas this week.
BURACZYK: When we saw what happened to our community in 2011, we made a decision, and we said, never again.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
GALLAGHER (on camera): Well, this doesn't mean the winter storm was not challenging here in El Paso. In fact, they had employees working around the clock making sure that this city did not suffer the same fate as others in this state. They did say that about 3,000 households lost power but fewer than 900 were for more than five minutes and they say that almost every household had power back on within a few hours.
Dianne Gallagher, CNN, El Paso, Texas.
HILL: My next guest has been warning about the U.S. power grid for nearly two decades.
Bill Richardson served, of course, as energy secretary under President Clinton.
Good to have you with us today.
You know, back in 2003 was when you said the U.S. was a, quote, superpower with a third world power transmission grid. So based on that, are you surprised at all by what we saw this week, this past week in Texas?
BILL RICHARDSON, FORMER ENERGY SECRETARY UNDER PRESIDENT CLINTON: Well, climate change has caused this. Yes, I was surprised. I thought that even though the grid in Texas was decentralized and not much regulation, that they would have winterized and they would have taken steps to deal better with the preparedness and maintenance of their grid.
But as you mentioned, when I was energy secretary in 2000, we had this grid problem, massive, in California and then in the Midwest, in 2003, rolling blackouts. So we have to modernize our infrastructure, our power grids.
We talk about infrastructure, yes, it's important. Bridges, highways, broadband, but left behind is our power grids. The three power grids that exist today but still have not managed to modernize.
There's too little capacity. Their lines are inefficient. Not enough investment and upgrading and maintaining them.
So we've got to make an effort in an infrastructure piece of legislation to include -- to include our power grid, our energy transmission lines. Otherwise, these crises are going to happen nationally. It's not just going to be Texas, because of climate change and freezing and overheating and lack of maintenance and modernizing our energy facilities.
HILL: So, to that point, do you think this is enough of a wake-up call? Because we've had issues, as you point out, for decades, and people have been warning of this for decades. Is this enough to spur action?
RICHARDSON: Yes, I believe the president, who's responded well saying we need more energy investments in renewable energy, solar and wind. He's taken these steps to deal with the crisis in Texas, the emergency declarations.
But I think we've got to go one step further. This is an opportunity to include the power grid in an infrastructure bill but because of our spending on the COVID, you know, we're spending trillions, I think this is a way to find a cooperative public/private partnership to invest in the grid.
Capital markets are ready to work with the government, loan guarantees, ways that together we can find tax credits so that micro grids and the local communities can come from the big grids so that local communities can install rooftop solar, can install water systems that are energy-efficient.
I think we've got to be creative but we can't just say we're going to put all federal money into the grid. I think there's an opportunity for co-investments with capital markets that are right (ph) --
HILL: And do you --
(CROSSTALK)
RICHARDSON: -- to invest, I believe.
HILL: And do you think, you know, proposing that, could that be more palatable across the board? There was a lot of finger-pointing as we saw this week, which also involved throughout the week. You know, everybody sort of wants a scapegoat and a lot turned into politicking.
But the bottom line is the system failed. Millions of people were left in the cold. At least 26 people died and the issue is not just going to get better from finger-pointing.
So do you think that that's a way to perhaps bring about more bipartisan support which we know exists for investing in infrastructure, but perhaps making it more palatable across the board, something like you propose, a public/private, bringing in corporations, perhaps?
RICHARDSON: Yeah, I believe what you just said is the answer. In other words, because of the crisis that just happened. And the fact that the infrastructure initiative has bipartisan support and had it under President Trump. They just didn't get it done.
But I think today, with this crisis, with the need to modernize our grid because of future potential problems, we can do it. But we can't just say we're going to spend federal money. It's got to be partnerships with states, with local communities, with the private sector.
It's got to be incentives so that capital markets can invest in infrastructure, so that they invest in renewable energy and solar and wind. And we should stop this politicking. To blame the solar and wind that accounts just 10 percent of the grid there when the natural gas pipelines in Texas were exploding because the control heads hadn't been modernized in ten years, they weren't working.
You know, this is not a time to play politics. Texas was affected with oil, natural gas, coal, nuclear and renewables, but it was the grid, and it's a lack of regulation and investment that caused this.
So let's try to fix this, make it a national bipartisan effort and I think President Biden is on the right path in pushing short-term for helping Texas and also a national strategy. But something creative like a public/private partnership capital markets on infrastructure, on our grid, I think needs to be proposed and pushed on a bipartisan basis.
HILL: Bill Richardson, always great to have you. Appreciate your insight. Thank you.
We want to get now to this breaking news out of Colorado -- reports of airplane debris in several neighborhoods outside of Denver. According to the Broomfield Police Department, a number of -- a fair amount were spotted in Broomfield. So, a man in the area took these photos, post them as you can see some of the debris here.
The Broomfield Police Department tweeting that it has been getting reports of a plane flying over the area with engine trouble. The debris was dropped in several neighborhoods around 1:08 p.m. local time. The good news, no injuries have been reported.
The plane did not land in Broomfield, but we can tell you, Broomfield, which is about 25 miles north of Denver, is about 30 miles east of Denver International Airport, where we want to go straight now to CNN's Pete Muntean, our aviation correspondent.
So, Pete, as we're following this, as I understand it, an official has just confirmed that a United plane that was on route to Hawaii had engine issues, returned to Denver International Airport.
What more do we know?
PETE MUNTEAN, CNN AVIATION CORRESPONDENT (via telephone): That's right, Erica. You know, it's really remarkable, these images that we're seeing that keep coming in. Denver International Airport officials now tell us United Flight 328, a Boeing 777, large wide body airliner, bound for Honolulu, returned to the airport after having engine trouble.
[16:15:06]
And neighbors say, who took these photos of the large airplane parts in their yard, that they heard a loud boom and these parts rained down into their yard, and to me looks like parts of the engine of this Boeing 777.
HILL: Wow.
MUNTEAN: Really, more images keep coming up by the moment and you have to applaud the flight crew here for doing such an incredible job of getting this airplane back. This is so may incredibly rare than a commercial airliner, in an age when commercial air travel is the safest that it's ever been would have an in-flight like this, and lose parts mid-air and then make a successful return back to the airport.
Really, pretty incredible flying by the crew. It sounds like passengers have been getting off of this flight, have been talking to local media. They cheered when the plane landed, of course.
But this is something that is very abnormal, very unique and very rare. And it seems like a really professional job by the flight crew here.
We're standing by for more from United Airlines and also standing by for more from the FAA.
HILL: Absolutely.
MUNTEAN: But a lot of coordination had to take place to get this airplane back safely.
HILL: It certainly did. And as you point out, you know, we should say the local police department there in Broomfield saying no injuries reported at this time. These pictures keep coming in of the debris. No injuries on board, the plane landed safely. All of that is so remarkable.
You know, I was looking at these pictures earlier, Pete, and I was trying to figure out what this large disc is in the front yard of the home. So, I know you've seen of those. So, that you're saying that disc, essentially, that we see, that looks like it would be part of the engine?
MUNTEAN: Yeah, to me, this looks like part of the engine, nacelle is what it's called, which is essentially, the parts that surrounds the fast-moving turbine inside of the jet engine.
HILL: Uh-huh.
MUNTEAN: This is sort of the outer exterior portion, is what it looks like to me. One of the photos that looks like it's the very front of the engine nacelle around the opening for the jet engine. Another photo to me looks like part of the pylon that hangs off of the wing that contains the actual jet engine.
So, these are really robust, highly engineered pieces.
HILL: Wow.
MUNTEAN: One has to wonder as you look at this, and you hear the reports of a boom like this that was audible from the ground is, was there an explosion of some type and how big it had to be to shake loose parts from a very well-fortified airplane such as the Boeing 777?
Really incredible that this even happened in the first place, and incredible that they got back safely. Really, good work.
HILL: It certainly is. As you mentioned, people getting off the plane, I know there were reports from local media, they were cheering as they landed. You said it was a 777. We know it was supposed to be on route to Honolulu.
Do we know how many passengers were on board?
MUNTEAN: I don't think we know that just yet. We're still waiting on official word on that from the airline. It would be the only one who could tell us how many people were on board.
A 777 like this is usually, these flights are packed with people and a 777 is a very large airliner, a wide-bodied airliner. So, not the sort of more narrow body like a 737 with one aisle down the center and typically coach in the back, there are two aisles so usually a 2-3-2 seating configuration.
A lot of people would usually be on board a 777, but we know the pandemic has really decimated air travel right now. So, these flights aren't really operating at sort of the packed level that they were back in 2019 and before the pandemic. But presumably a lot of people on this, although we don't have the official count just yet.
HILL: Pete, I have to tell you, I can't -- we have this image up on the screen, you know, of this front part as you pointed out of what appears to be the part of the engine. I mean, just put this in perspective for us. We're talking about how remarkable this would be, but to land a plane that, from what we know at this point, had lost an engine, right, to land that plane safely with as of now, no injuries.
I believe we're just getting in some live pictures here. This is also of this town just outside Denver, as we look for some of the debris there. I mean, Pete, just put that in perspective for us. Not only the rarity of that, but just how remarkable that would be for the pilot, for the flight crew to do this.
MUNTEAN: You know, 777 is a twin engine jet. Two jet engines, which adds a lot of redundancy. You don't see any single engine jets in commercial airliners but it is much harder to fly on one engine. If the reports that we're hearing of an explosion are accurate, it sounds like you could only fly on one engine at that point.
[16:20:09]
And that's essentially like, if you ever paddled a canoe or a kayak in dragon paddle, it's essentially like flying an airplane with a dragon paddle at one side and only able to paddle with the other side.
So, the plane sort of flies a little sideways and it takes a lot of training to be able to do that properly and to be able to make sure that the airplane sort of doesn't turn into the dead engine and can still fly straight and then also, it's not just in the air, but to do that with the landing.
You know, the conditions are dynamic and so to be able to keep the airplane aligned straight, I'm seeing new video on social media, on Twitter of what looked to be a near perfect landing. Aside from the fact that what looks like the engine was completely inoperable and may have had an explosion of some type on board.
So really good flying by these pilots and a testament to their training. You know, professional flight crews like this train all of the time in simulators and to be a 777 captain and first officer, you have to have a lot of experience to do that. So, it's a testament to how safe commercial air travel is in this modern era.
HILL: Yeah, just such an excellent point, not only the initial training but the continued training that these flight crews go through. We're looking at live pictures now. I don't think you can see this but to give folks tuning in now, if you're just joining us, what you're looking at are some pictures from our affiliate, KMGH, from the chopper, we look at on the ground.
It looks like you can see a yellow police tape. You see a vehicle, presumably from the red vehicle from the fire department, that's because there's debris on the ground, which is presumed to be from this United Airlines flight.
We're going to take a quick break as we gather a little bit more information for you. But stay with us, again, we're with breaking news of broken air debris in a neighborhood, a neighborhood outside of Denver from a United Airlines flight which we're told now landed safely at Denver International Airport.
We'll have the latest for you on the other side of this break. Stay with us.
[16:26:32]
HILL: If you're just joining us now, updating you on the breaking news out of Colorado. So what you're looking at is what is believed to be a piece of a Boeing 777 flight that had left Denver International Airport, bound, we believe, for Honolulu, United Airlines flight, not long into the flight. There were some issues and debris, reports of debris falling in Broomfield, Colorado, which is just north of Denver, 25 miles east of Denver international airport. The local police department tweeting they first received information about debris falling in different neighborhoods in Broomfield around 1:08 local time. So, that's -- just about an hour and 20 minutes or so ago.
So, now, as we're piecing everything together, what we can tell you is that flight did safely land. How the pilot, the flight crew were able to do that, perhaps nothing short of miraculous as we start to piece together what happened. Again, these are live pictures of the debris in someone's front yard, as you can see there.
CNN's Aviation Correspondent, Pete Muntean is with us on the phone.
So, Pete, for people who were just joining us, you were telling us what this giant circle in front of the office. You believe that's likely one part of the two engines on the 777.
MUNTEAN: To me, those parts look like part of the engine nacelle. That is the structure around the jet again, and I just now got a statement from the FAA saying that this flight safely returned to Denver International Airport, United Airlines flight.
And we know now specifically the problem in the right engine, failure of the right engine shortly after takeoff and the FAA said it's investigating reports of this debris that rained down on people's yards on the plane's flight path, which also is so interesting in the statement we're just finding out, is that the passengers had been deplaned on the runway. Runway there at Denver and then bussed back to the terminal.
This is really an incredible and such a rare situation in the world of commercial aviation, which is safer than it has ever been. Passengers reported -- oh, sorry -- people on the ground reported hearing a loud boom and then finding all this debris in their yard. Really, hats off to the flight crew here.
The video and photos on social media keep popping of what appears to be this right engine completely torn apart.
I'm a pilot. I've been flying my whole life. I'm a flight instructor. Pilots train and drill almost from the get-go in their training how to deal with an engine failure, and it is not easy, especially when you're confronted with the startle factor of all this.
Given the fact these folks on the ground are reporting a loud boom, can't imagine what this flight crew was going through and how busy they had to be, a busy time, especially, just after taking off, typically, in a commercial airliner, to have to turn back after something like this, and deal with the emergency, really, is a testament to their training and their professionalism as pilots, really something not easy to do.
HILL: No, Pete, you pointed out in that statement you just received from the FAA that they said it was the right engine that failed shortly after takeoff. I mean, just give us a sense. You know, you talk about the intense training that flight crews go through.
[16:30:00]
But if you lose one engine in this massive airliner, if you could, just again, put in perspective for us what it is like for that flight crew, for the pilot, not only to suddenly realize, as you point out, that you have lost an engine, but now you are trying to pilot this aircraft and to land it safely.
It is just a remarkable feat to put it mildly.
MUNTEAN (via telephone): It's very, very tricky. And I've flow in twin engine airplanes, twin engine airplanes like the 777 before. Not during something like this. But, even still, the fundamentals stand.
When you're flying an airplane with two engines and lose one of them -- we're not talking about losing literally one of them in this case -- but the engine fails for some reason, there's a whole set of procedures you have to go through.
And then the physics of the airplane changed dramatically. In a commercial airliner like this, it's still the same as on a lighter airplane with two engines as well.
You're essentially flying with a big dragging -- if you've ever been with a kayak or canoe, a dragging on one side and you can only really turn it into the dead engine. It can be very difficult.
And because of that, the airplane loses a lot of its inherent performance. It can't climb as well. It can't turn as well. It makes it much harder to control.
Commercial airliners are very powerful, And because of the pandemic, it's probably safe to assume that this airplane was not completely full and maybe a bit on the lighter side rather than the heavy/fully loaded. So that would work to the crew's favor very likely.
But have to not only encounter the problem, but figure out the problem, work through it, and follow a certain set of procedures to make sure that the engine is shut off and safe, that it couldn't cause any more potential damage, and then to have to return to the airport is a testament to the crew.
But also the folks on the ground who handled it. The air traffic controllers, I'm sure, as this develops, we're going to hear live air traffic control audio.
And typically, in these cases, the high-stakes, high-risk scary situations for our flight crew, very smooth and calm.
And that's because pilots and flight crews, also the folks in the back and the flight attendants train for things like this and make sure, when it happens, they can deal with it quickly and easily as if it's second nature.
And so -- (CROSSTALK)
HILL: They know exactly how to spring into action.
(CROSSTALK)
HILL: Pete, stay with us. I know you're also working a number of your sources as you try to get more information from the airline, the FAA.
We are showing you, for folks tuning in at home here, these are pictures from our affiliate, KMGH. These are pictures, we believe, of Broomfield, Colorado.
This is where the police department they first received reports of debris falling in a number of neighborhoods. That's why we're showing you these aerial pictures as our affiliate obviously trying to get a sense of where there may be some of this debris on the ground.
Stay with us. We're going to take a short break here on CNN, but our live coverage of this breaking news continues right here.
Again, a United Airlines flight, Denver to Honolulu, experiencing, according to the FAA, who tells our Pete Muntean, it safely returned to Denver International Airport after the right engine failed shortly after takeoff, landed safely.
We'll have the very latest for you on the other side of this short break.
You're live in the CNN NEWSROOM.
[16:37:57]
HILL: Our breaking news, a massive 777 airliner, operated by United Airlines, of course, making an emergency landing after its right engine failed.
Before that emergency landing, though, huge pieces of debris falling in a neighborhood near Denver. At least one piece landing just inches from a home.
You're looking at these pieces on what appear to be soccer fields. When we pull out to a bigger view there, our affiliate, KMGH, bringing us these pictures.
We can tell you we have been told all passengers are OK. The plane was able to land safely.
Joining us now is CNN aviation analyst, Mary Schiavo, former inspector general for the U.S. Department of Transportation.
Mary, always good to have you with us in these moments.
I'm not sure. I'm hoping you've been able to see some of these pieces of debris. Our aviation correspondent, Pete Muntean, saying one of them really looked like an engine under a wing that we're used to seeing on a plane.
MARY SCHIAVO, CNN AVIATION ANALYST (via telephone): That's right. This was a catastrophic engine failure. People think that the cowling, the housing around the engine, will contain it but it really won't.
Because an engine coming apart, the shrapnel literally spinning from the engine, and it flies at hundreds of miles an hour, coming apart in the aircraft. Very dangerous. The flight, of course, extremely lucky.
But the real issue will be, how old was the engine, who manufactured the engine.
There was a Boeing 747 that suffered one just a few days ago in Europe. And so they'll be looking to see if there's some sort of systemic issue that can exist on more than one aircraft engine or if this was something related to maintenance.
But, indeed, these are very large pieces. It's not unusual for parts to fall off in an aircraft. It's something we certainly don't want to see.
[16:40:02]
But you know everything from flaps to parts of landing gear, many things have fallen off a plane, but usually not this much of an engine.
HILL: It's also, too, as we look at where this happened. So we are seeing tweets from the Broomfield, Colorado, Police Department. They said their first reports came in around 1:08 of people reporting debris.
There was a sound that people heard. So was it an explosion or a boom? Those are things we're trying to track down at this point.
But the police department saying -- there are several neighborhoods and we're seeing several different areas with these massive pieces of debris.
The fact that, as of this point, the police department is saying there have been no injuries reported is remarkable.
SCHIAVO: It truly is. And of course, part of the credit goes to where the airport is located.
You remember, the old Denver airport was right downtown Denver. It was right over, near next to the city, right over people's heads. And of course, 20 years ago, they moved it to DIA, Denver International.
And that's one of the things you want. When you build a new airport, you want it away from the population. Long runways with no hazards at the end of the runway, long parallel runways.
So part of the credit here goes to the fact that this was not over a major city.
And the other thing that's interesting is most uncontained engine failures do happen on takeoff and climb out.
So if you're going to experience one, it's very fortunate -- it doesn't look fortunate when you look at the pictures. But you're very fortunate this happened on takeoff and they could get back to the airport.
Imagine if they were out over the ocean and had thousands of miles to get back to an airport.
And so lots of fortune and some planning that allowed this to have a good ending.
HILL: Of course, including a safe landing, we're told.
SCHIAVO: Right.
HILL: Passengers, we're told, on the runway and then being bussed in.
I know we're going to get some more details. But, just quickly, before we let you go, on this point, I don't think we can underscore enough, too, just how critical the training and the skill of the flight crew are in here, in this equation.
SCHIAVO: Oh, absolutely. This is something pilots do train for. Whether you fly a single engine, two engine, four engine, you train for an engine out.
But that being said, it's very difficult. Kudos to the pilots for keeping it in the air and under control and making a safe controlled landing.
But it is something they're trained for. And that's why pilots have to have thousands of hours -- well, not by law you don't have to have thousands.
The FAA allows you to have a commercial flight to license for a few hundred hours. But most major carriers, their captains have thousands of hours. And the training matters.
HILL: Certainly does.
And, Mary, as always. Really appreciate your insight, your expertise.
Stay with us, everyone. We follow this breaking news. You're looking, of course, at this debris. Cameras moving around here to get a better look at some of the debris on the ground in Broomfield, Colorado, outside of Denver.
I'm going to speak with an eyewitness to this debris, next.
[16:47:33] HILL: We are following breaking news this afternoon. A United Airlines passenger plane, a massive Boeing 777 experiencing what our own aviation expert said looks like catastrophic engine failure.
This is what has been found on the ground. Bits and pieces of what appear to be an engine from that plane.
Now, the plane, United Airlines flight 328, was en route from Denver to Honolulu, turned around after what the FAA tells my colleague, Pete Muntean, was a right engine that failed shortly after takeoff, was able to land safely, back at Denver International Airport.
Which is not too far from Broomfield, Colorado, which is where you're looking at this debris. And there are several sites in the area with debris.
Joining us on the phone is Kieran Cain who took some pictures of the debris. You're looking at one of those photos now.
Kieran, good to have you with us. Glad you're safe.
Just walk us through what happened.
KIERAN CAIN, WITNESS TO FALLING DEBRIS FROM AIRPLANE (via telephone): Yes, thanks, Erica.
It was about an hour ago. I was playing with our two kids at a local elementary school, honestly, on the basketball, just having fun.
An airplane was flying really high overhead and basically what sounded like a sonic boom made everybody look up.
As we did, we could see there was a giant black cloud of smoke high up in the sky, immediately followed by what looked like pieces of the aircraft, really just coming off and basically a shower of things that were falling out of the sky. So immediately, you could see stuff walking down.
Quite hard to get a sense of, you know, how big things were because it was so up.
But after a while, it started to get closer to the ground, you could really see there was giant -- what looked like -- and one, in particular, that was a giant "O" ring that was just plummeting to the ground. And unbelievably, the plane kept going on its own trajectory.
But, yes, basically, just all the stuff started showering down on the neighborhood.
HILL: And so you're exposed, right? So you're at the playground with your kids on a Saturday afternoon like so many families. I imagine you're watching this not only in disbelief.
But there must have been a moment as well -- was there somewhere you could seek shelter? Were you worried this debris was actually coming toward you and your family? [16:50:03]
CAIN: Yes, totally. I mean, after a moment of shock and disbelief, I was like, what the heck was that. And then, is everybody on that plane OK, because it sounded like something exploded.
But when you could see stuff float down, we didn't know what it was. It looked like rubber. It looked like metal. Who knows if there's jet fuel in there?
Luckily enough, we took shelter at a near gazebo at the playground we are at and watched it come down. And we could see, it was really starting to land about two or three blocks, just a few houses over from where we were.
HILL: So that's when you made your way over there. You snapped some of the pictures, which we're showing now.
Were you -- was the homeowner there? Were you able to speak with the folks who live in that house? I'm guessing they're OK.
CAIN: Yes, somehow, unbelievably, they're OK. There was one or two Houses we came over with giant holes in the roof and big pieces of metal.
This looks like a giant circular engine piece that hit top of his R.V., bounced off of his garage and somehow landed on his front porch.
But did get the chance to speak to him. In his words, oh, my gosh, for a couple of minutes there, it was raining metal, were his words, and then, suddenly, this giant thing just landed on his house.
HILL: As you made your way over there, you said the first responders in town were not very far behind you.
What else did you see as you walked over there and what did they say to you?
CAIN: Totally. We saw the incident go down. I immediately called 9/11 and said, this is an area where stuff is falling. As soon as I hung up the phone, there were sirens, so they were there right away.
On this one particular street, when I took these photos, literally, every 10 feet, there was a giant piece of metal. Looks like pieces of wing. The type of things you might see on an airplane with instructions on it you might see on door of an aircraft.
But it was certainly not contained to the one street. Since we've been here, the first responders are cordoning off with tape streets in the area.
There's a giant park right across the street they've just put police tape all the way around.
(CROSSTALK) CAIN: So literally, the spread of the debris is going on for several block radius. And, yes, there's just stuff. The ground is littered with all kinds of different pieces of junk.
HILL: Which is amazing and just giant pieces at that.
I don't know if your power lines are aboveground or not in Broomfield, but if they are, did you see any downed power lines?
Did anything appear to be -- you mentioned the one piece of debris we kept seeing that bounced, you said the homeowner, bounced off of his R.V., in his word.
Did you see anything else sort of stuck in trees or any way that may also be cause for a neighborhood to be sectioned off just from a safety perspective as well?
CAIN: Well, I think one thing we did see, Erica, I like to point out, there's been a couple looking out for the neighborhood. Told people not to touch the debris.
We see people trying to pick up pieces and take photos. Instantly, the first responders told them not to do that because they don't know what's on there and if it's safe. Even heard one first responder says these are not souvenirs.
So it's more about, besides the debris, anything from maybe the size of a quarter, up, to pieces two to six feet in length. And obviously, the big circular engine thing we've seen. But all kinds of different debris and materials.
Other than the holes we've seen in some roofs and stuff falling on cars and houses, nothing else besides that. But it's really hard, honestly, to get a good sense of it because it's spread over so many houses and streets.
HILL: Yes, it's just amazing the size as we're going to learn of this debris field in the town.
Do you know -- I know you were saying areas are being cordoned off. First responders putting up that caution tape to keep people out.
Have they evacuated any area you're aware of?
CAIN: We were here on the main street we're on right now where it seems like a lot of activity is, Elmwood in Broomfield, Colorado on one street.
We witnessed they were going house to house doing searching to make sure people were OK. I didn't hear anyone as they reported back.
One of the houses with a giant hole in its roof, some piece of metal fell into that family's attic. And luckily, nobody was in the house at the time it appears.
So despite there being a bunch of ambulances and things like that, luckily, we have luckily not seen anyone actually being impacted or injured.
HILL: That is good news, as you point out. Wow. What a day.
[16:55:01]
Kieran Cain, really appreciate you taking the time to be with us.
I'm just curious. You mentioned you were with your kids. How are they doing after seeing all of this?
CAIN: They're doing OK. It's the last thing you expect to see at the local playground.
And there's a massive, kind of like a sonic boom in the sky, which would rattle anybody. First of all, just the sound of it.
But once you started seeing stuff fall down, quite significant pieces out of the sky, their immediate reactions and immediate thoughts are, is everybody OK on the airplane.
The surprise I had is something could make a noise like that and giant pieces off the plane and then continue on its trajectory like nothing happened.
So, hopefully, everybody is doing OK on the airplane.
HILL: To your point, I want to tell what we've learned, and maybe you can pass on to your kids as well, who clearly have their hearts in the right place, when we hear their initial reaction, my colleague, our aviation correspondent told by the FAA, they did land safely. They're alright.
For folks just joining us, we're talking about what is happening just outside of Denver, in Broomfield, Colorado.
We are looking at pictures of airline debris in the front yard of homes and across this town after United Airlines flight 328, a Boeing 777, had a right engine failure, according to the FAA, shortly after takeoff.
This flight was scheduled to go from Denver to Honolulu today, turned around, and the pilot and flight crew was able to land the aircraft safely back at Denver International Airport, which is about 25 miles away, as I understand it, from this town, Broomfield, Colorado, outside of Denver.
CAIN: Thank you very much.
HILL: Yes.
The flight landed safely. Passengers were able to deplane. Some of reporting, they were cheering, understandably, as the plane landed. They were deplaned, we're told by our aviation correspondent, Pete Muntean. They deplaned on the runway and then took a bus in.
What we know so far from the FAA is that there was a failure in the right engine and that is what caused the issue shortly after takeoff. Again, it did safely return.
We were just listening to Kieran Cain, who was at a playground in Broomfield with his kids, 11 and 8-year-olds, when they heard a sonic boom, in his words, and then saw a giant black cloud of smoke.
And, all of a sudden, this shower, is the way he described it, falling from the sky that appeared to be plane parts. And he said, as they got closer, that's when they could see really what they were.
He and his family took shelter under a gazebo in that park in that nearby playground where they were and then made their way a couple of blocks over to see some of the debris.
He actually took a picture. I'm not sure if we can put it up. This picture that Kieran Cain took of some of the debris in the front yard.
He said he spoke with the homeowner who said that giant ring that you see, which we believe what's called the engine nacelle, part of that, possibly the right engine.
The homeowner said that bounced off of his R.V., ultimately landing -- you see it there -- basically on his front stoop. He says he's OK. The family is OK.
Again, Kieran Cain, who took this picture, said first responders were on the scene almost immediately. He said he called 9/11. He heard sirens behind him immediately. And he did see officers going door to door making sure that people were OK, checking on homes.
And we -- I believe, are going to go now to a press conference.
Let's listen in.
RACHEL WELTE, SPOKESWOMAN, BROOMFIELD POLICE DEPARTMENT: The neighborhood, which isn't far from here, just here to my left. So we started to get reports.
We dispatched police officers and within minutes, we were on scene of some of these homes and we actually saw some of these large pieces of debris, which you're seeing circulate on social media.
Remarkably, we have had no injuries reported yet. So considering how nice the weather is today, compared to last weekend, the amount of debris and how far it stretches -- the dog park is here and the turf field behind me -- and we have had no reports of any injuries.
The biggest thing right now is we are now securing the scene and all of the debris for the NTSB. They dispatched a team to this area.
We're asking people, because the debris was so far and wide, if you find debris in your home, near your home, in your neighborhood, please don't touch it. Please don't move it. Just leave it there.
Call dispatch. You can call 303-438-6400 or 911 if it's an emergency. Let us know, because we're trying to get an idea of how far this debris field is. UNIDENTIFIED REPORTER: What are some of the reports you've been hearing from folks on the ground?
WELTE: We have a lot of people coming by right now. And mostly was the sound. A lot of people say they heard the really loud explosion, which startled a lot of people.
And then they just started seeing basically what they thought was the plane falling from the sky. What it was, was debris.
[17:00:02]
It's hard to determine exactly what it is. I did kind of comb through, taking a look at some of the debris. It looks like possibly some exterior pieces of the plane.
Load-Date: February 20, 2021



End of Document


Millions Without Water In Texas After Deadly Storms; Biden Approves Disaster Declaration For Texas; Pfizer Submits New Data To Show Its COVID-19 Vaccine Can Be Stored At Warmer Temperature; NY Gov. Cuomo Blames "Misinformation" For Nursing Home Scandal As His Personal Behavior Is Scrutinized; Interview With State Sen. Alessandra Biaggi (D-NY); Prince Charles Visits Ailing Prince Philip At Hospital; Prince Harry & Meghan Are Officially Done As Working Royals. Aired 1-2p ET
CNN CNN NEWSROOM 1:00 PM EST
February 20, 2021 Saturday

Copyright 2021 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved 
Section: NEWS; Domestic
Length: 6555 words
Byline: Fredricka Whitfield, Omar Jimenez, Allison Chinchar, Athena Jones, Nic Robertson, Brian Todd, Vanessa Yurkevich, Victoria Arbiter
Guests: David Callaway, Alessandra Biaggi
Highlight: Millions of Texans are facing water shortages after the deadly winter storm ravaging the state caused pipes to burst and treatment plants to back up, disrupting services and contaminating supplies. President Joe Biden has approved a major disaster declaration for Texas, unlocking more federal resources to assist the state struggling to recover from deadly winter storms. Pfizer-BioNTech says it has submitted new data to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to show that its COVID-19 vaccine can be stored at warmer temperatures.
Body




[13:00:45]
FREDRICKA WHITFIELD, CNN HOST: Hello again, everyone. Thank you so much for joining me. I'm Fredricka Whitfield. All right, we begin this hour in Texas where temperatures and tempers are rising, snow and ice is melting with a new crisis limited water. Right now nearly half of the Texas population is under a boil water advisory after frigid temperatures crippled the power grid, frozen burst water pipes.
Thousands of people are waiting in long lines trying to get their hands now on bottled water. In San Antonio overnight, firefighters were unable to use frozen fire hydrants and were forced to find water elsewhere as they battled a fire at a Hilton Garden in. The storms have also created a backlog of coronavirus vaccines. The White House saying six million doses have been unable to be distributed because of the weather.
And this morning President Joe Biden approved a major disaster declaration for Texas, freeing up federal resources to help in that hard hit state. CNN's Omar Jimenez is in Austin, Texas. So Omar, what is the situation there?
OMAR JIMENEZ, CNN CORRESPONDENT: Well, Fred, the good news to start off is these are the warmest temperatures we have seen all week. And we are on the other side of what should be the last night of freezing temperatures this week. So, for the first time Texans are getting the chance to play offense in taking care of themselves. So, they are hitting the stores trying to scavenge for what is left stocked up in these grocery stores.
In many cases, people had to throw away the food they stocked up on because they lost power over the course of this week. So, again, people are trying to inch back towards some sense of normalcy. And I'll start with the good news. And that comes down to electricity, as at least here in Austin 97 percent of the power has been restored. And when you look across the State of Texas, for the first time we're under 100,000 power outages. When at one point during this week, we were well over three million. Now the next frontier though, here's where we get to the bad news is water. A lot of people still do not have water in this state. More than 15 million people have had their water disrupted in one way or another but progress inch by inch is being made in places across the state including in tech -- in Houston, excuse me, where Mayor Sylvester Turner says they're making headway.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
MAYOR SYLVESTER TURNER (D), HOUSTON, TX: The system across the board has now normalized itself. You know, a couple of days ago, the water pressure, for example, was around averaging 29. And then on yesterday we said between 32 and 34, 35. You want to be 35 and above across the entire system. But today, because of the efforts of Public Works, Director Kara Haddock and her team, we above 50 PSI, above 50. So, you --
(END VIDEO CLIP)
JIMENEZ: And here and the Texas State Capitol, we're a little bit over halfway to getting to the minimum water pressure necessary to pump water out throughout the city, as we understand from water officials here. They're optimistic they could get it back by the end of this weekend. But as you mentioned before coming to me with President Biden approving this major disaster declaration, individuals now be able to request federal assistance, Fred.
WHITFIELD: All right. Omar, thank you so much for that. So, as local and state leaders in Texas grapple with this situation, some are simply fed up with the response from state and federal officials. I spoke with one Texas Mayor this morning who had this to say.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
MAYOR LARRY WALLACE, MANOR, TX: Honestly, I've lost all faith in senior leadership. They have proven time and time again over the last 12 months. And for us having three declared disasters. COVID which was the first national that went across all states. The threat on violence that Governor Abbott declared here and renewed it back in January and then now the inclement weather.
I have only heard from council members and fellow mayors that I've built relationships with around here. My county commissioner and our brand new county judge. Everybody else is a last hope. I'm just going to be frank with it. And that's how everybody feels.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WHITFIELD: Lots of frustration and still, at least in that city still waiting for some big answers. Joining me now to discuss is Dr. David Callaway, the chief of disaster medicine for Atrium Health and he's also the chief medical officer for Team Rubicon. Doctor, good to see you.
[13:05:11] DR. DAVID CALLAWAY, CHIEF OF DISASTER MEDICINE, ATRIUM HEALTH: Hey, Fredricka.
WHITFIELD: So, we've got thousands of Texans who have no water, they're still dealing with power outages. What kind of concerns you the most in these dire situations?
CALLAWAY: Well, I think that one initial story is just to look at the individual heroism that's going on with, you know, some of our volunteers from Team Rubicon, pivoting from vaccinations to warming stations and water distribution. And then my good friend, Dr. Jason Pickett in Austin where you guys are just reporting from, he and the Travis County EMS team, you know, responding to 500 percent more calls going out to homes, providing hospital level care in these houses.
I mean, this is tremendous. But heroism isn't a strategy. And it's great to see, but we need to start thinking about reinvesting in our infrastructure, the energy infrastructure, the hospitals. And what worries me is we're getting another lesson, like we learned from COVID about the impact of disparities in care and how we need to fundamentally reshape, how we deliver care in crisis.
WHITFIELD: Right. So, like that mayor was talking about in Manor, I mean, yes, heroic deeds, but also huge disparities. So, you know, we've got the midst of -- in the midst of this pandemic, there is a lot of suffering. And now you've got this near collapse, Texas power grid, also revealing a lack of cohesive planning for disasters. What are you hoping that officials might learn from this so as to prepare for the next, you know, calamity?
CALLAWAY: Well, one of the things we've learned in Charlotte, we've been pretty fortunate over the last year is this power of novel public private partnerships. So, when we look at expanding testing for coronavirus or distributing mass or, you know, our pretty successful mass vaccination programs, we partnered with a bunch of companies and partners outside of the health sector.
So Honeywell, Bank of America, Wells Fargo, the Panthers, these are the type of partners we need to bring in to help work with state and local government in order to really get solutions. And we need to let teams lead. So, I understand the frustration of the mayor who is just on, because there are a lot of people who are used to managing in blue sky days, but not leading in crisis.
And we have moments like we do right now. Leadership is important, they need to be present, they need to be transparent, and they need to be bold, and they need to let their teams actually do the work and help our communities get through this.
WHITFIELD: And aside from government or leadership, what about for individual families? What are you hoping they might learn or glean from this in terms of preparedness or response? I mean, you know, trying as best to control what they can or respond to what they can on their level, from household to household.
CALLAWAY: Yes. Frederica, it's really hard. In modern society, we're very dependent on technology. And we're very dependent on just in time resources, we expect to be able to go to the grocery store at any time and get food. And so, this is a challenge, we built a comfortable society. And so, what individuals need to do is recognize that, in general, that's great. But you need to be prepared, and you need to be responsible for your own safety as much as you can.
So, having water, having backup batteries, a generator, if you can, knowing where your family members are, so you can support them. But as much as individual preparedness is important, we need to recognize that there is a huge swath of society that just can't do that.
WHITFIELD: Right.
CALLAWAY: They're working two or three shifts. You know, they have multigenerational families, they may not have the resources. So, this is where government and the private sector needs to come in and recognize that we know what the problems are. We just need to help people get the solutions.
WHITFIELD: Yes, it's a giant web. So, back to coronavirus and this vaccine and now Pfizer is now saying that it's -- it has submitted new data to the FDA that shows its coronavirus vaccine can be stormed -- stored rather at warmer temperatures, we're talking about now minus 12 degrees Fahrenheit instead of the minus 112 as in ultra-cold freezers. Do you see that this is going to make a big difference in reaching people?
CALLAWAY: I think it makes a difference. We already knew that we had a five-day window and now we may have up to a two-week window and some of the refrigeration changes. I mean, I -- again, I think the most important factor is we need to get vaccines into the hands of people who can deliver effectively and efficiently but also can make sure that there's equitable distribution.
And so, whether it's being able to administer the second vaccine at six or eight weeks, which I know is debated right now whether it's in increased flexibility in the storage, all of these things make our operational life easier. But the key is people need to want the vaccine. So, we need to overcome hesitancy. Distributors need to be able to get the vaccine. So, we need in our hands, and then we need to execute with speed.
[13:10:06]
CALLAWAY: And I think we can't do it. I think, you know, what we've seen is, you know, we now have blueprint, partners are coming together, we're ramping up distribution, and we're getting into the right people, and we're using data to help drive us so we made sure people are getting vaccinated.
WHITFIELD: Yes. This is -- this is all now helped accelerate the conversations about schools. You know, the CDC director, Dr. Rochelle Walensky now says given the right precautions, schools may open classrooms no matter how much virus is spreading in the community. Has the Biden administration school reopening guidance been clear enough or is it bringing more clarity? CALLAWAY: I think the CDC's updated guidance is great. And we need to remember that the CDC gives guidance. They don't mandate operations. But what I would say is, it's pretty clear what needs to be done for schools to be opened safely. People need to wear masks. You need to be able to physically distance students. It's great if you can do testing and quarantine and if there are positive cases. And then vaccinations certainly help.
But I think that they're not required to open school safely. But anything we can layer on is important. And I think it is critical. Again, going back to the disparity issue. It is critical that we get elementary, pre-K kids into school so that they are not falling behind and so that their parents can get to work and help our economy recover.
WHITFIELD: All right. Dr. David Callaway, good to see you. Thank you so much.
CALLAWAY: Thanks, Fredricka. Appreciate it.
WHITFIELD: Absolutely. More now on our severe weather. So, when can the folks in Texas get some relief from this devastating winter cold? Meteorologists Allison Chinchar is in the CNN weather center. Allison, good to see you. What's happening?
ALLISON CHINCHAR, CNN METEOROLOGIST: Right. Fred, there's light at the end of the tunnel. And I think that's the main focus. It's been a very cold tunnel. But we are starting to see those temperatures headed in the right direction. But look at this, the past week, we had over 3,000 record cold temperatures that were broken. 79 of them were all time records, meaning they broken for any day or any period throughout the year.
Now we're starting to see those temperatures get warmer, this is high temperatures expected for today. 50 for Dallas, almost 60 in Houston. So again, they're headed in the right direction. But here's one thing I would like to note. Some of these areas are still going to hit below freezing again tonight. So, all of that melting today is likely going to have some refreeze overnight.
So, that's going to be an impact for places like Amarillo, Oklahoma City, and even Little Rock. But that's just one of the impacts that we're still kind of concerned about. That ice and snow potentially refreezing overnight tonight after it melts today.
But also falling ice and snow. Those icicles that are on your roof, the ones hanging off of street signs over bridges and highways and such. You have to be careful and cautious around those because as it melts, those are going to start to come off as well.
So, do keep that in mind. And also pipes that may have been damaged over the last few days of the extreme cold temperatures. They don't always burst right away, it can be a delayed effect.
So keep that in mind. You may still have some of that in the coming days. Here's a look though, because at least the temperatures are headed in the right direction. Again, Dallas getting to almost near 60 by the time we get to Monday.
Houston getting into the 70s as we go through the next couple of days. And even Little Rock and Oklahoma City getting back into those low to mid 50s. So, again the main focus here, Fred, is that we're headed in the right direction. It's still going to take time to clean up but at least the weather looks like it will cooperate a little bit more in the coming days.
WHITFIELD: A glassful there. Thank you so much, Allison Chinchar. All right. Coming up, six million coronavirus, doses delayed because of all that severe weather however. So what is being done to speed up the distribution process.
And New York Governor Andrew Cuomo facing more backlash for his handling of coronavirus deaths in nursing homes. I'll talk live with a state senator who wrote the bill which would strip the governor of his emergency powers.
[13:18:04]
WHITFIELD: All right. More than 59 million coronavirus vaccine doses have now been administered in the U.S. according to the last -- the latest data rather from the CDC. This as the White House works just surge vaccine shipments after severe winter forced delays in several states over recent days. CNN's Athena Jones joining me now from New York. So Athena, what are you learning?
ATHENA JONES, CNN NATIONAL CORRESPONDENT: Hi, Fred. Well, first, let's break down that 59 million number. Over 41 million people have received at least one shot and over 17 million are fully vaccinated, so the numbers are rising steadily. But we also know as you mentioned, that bad weather led to a huge backlog. Some six million doses of a backlog. The White House saying that all 50 states were impacted.
In some cases, it was workers who were snowed in, they couldn't make it into work to ship and package and ship the vaccines and other cases. Over 2000 vaccine vaccination sites couldn't receive the vaccine in some cases because of power outages. The White House is working to fix. Advisor Andy Slavitt who is a senior adviser to the White House COVID-19 response team was talking about that. Here's what he had to say.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
ANDY SLAVITT, WHITE HOUSE SENIOR ADVISOR FOR THE COVID RESPONSE TEAM: Starting tomorrow, Saturday, we're going to be shipping more doses than then states have ever received before because we're going to be shipping this week's doses and next week's doses. We know this means for all the governors and other states that have said we want more vaccines that they're going to have to be ready, they're going to have to make more appointments, they're going to have to extend their hours. And we're really hoping everybody pulls together.
(END VIDEO CLIP) JONES: So, if those millions of doses, I really do get out that's going to be music to the ears of officials in places like New York who have been clamoring for more vaccines for places like the Javits Center where I am right now, one of several mass vaccination sites here in the city, where the issue really is lack of supply. Overall, though, I should say that we should point out that the overall picture is certainly getting better.
We're approaching an average of 70,000 new cases a day, that's still a high number. But remember, just a few months ago, we were looking at 200,000 cases a day on some days.
[13:20:07]
JONES: So, we're now seeing the steepest decline in new cases since the pandemic began down almost 30 percent week over week. So, things are looking up, Fred.
WHITFIELD: All right. Athena Jones in New York, thank you so much. Up next, America is back. President Biden on the world stage rejoining the Paris Climate Agreement and restarting nuclear talks with Iran.
WHITFIELD: All right. Joe Biden has delivered his first major speech as president to world leaders at the G7 conference and is making a promise that, I'm quoting him, "America is back."
[13:25:07]
WHITFIELD: The President reassuring our allies that after four years of Donald Trump things could be quite different. In a major policy change from the Trump administration. The U.S. has now rejoined the Paris Climate Agreement and Biden says his administration is now ready to talk to Iran about a nuclear deal. And on top of that, Biden is pledging billions for the global vaccine effort. Here now is Nic Robertson.
NIC ROBERTSON, CNN INTERNATIONAL DIPLOMATIC EDITOR: Well, the big headline from the G7 a commitment to get COVID vaccines to the poorer nations to speed the development and deployment of the vaccines to increase manufacturing capacity of vaccines and to share more information about variants of COVID-19 that can potentially, potentially be more deadly or more infectious.
So, that was a priority committing more money so that those vaccines can get to those poorer nations. $7.5 billion committed, President Biden came with his own money as well.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
JOE BIDEN, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES: We must cooperate if we're going to defeat COVID-19 everywhere. My first presidential massive security memorandum focused on surging health and humanitarian responses to defeat COVID-19. And to better prevent and prepare for the next pandemic. Today, I'm announcing the United States is making a $2 billion pledge to COVAX with the promise of an additional $2 billion to urge others to step up as well.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
ROBERTSON: And the G7 not the only event of the day, the Munich Security Conference, virtual as well, President Biden speaking there, talking about an inflection point in history where you can go with democracies or you can go with autocracies. He says that he wants to work with other Democratic nations to develop diplomatic plans to work together to hold China to account to hold Russia to account.
He said the United States is back, back on the world stage, wants to earn its place back in a leadership role welcomed by Boris Johnson.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
BORIS JOHNSON, BRITISH PRIME MINISTER: As you've seen and heard earlier, America is unreservedly back as the leader of the free world. And that is a fantastic thing. And it's vital for our American friends to know that their allies on this side of the Atlantic are willing and able to share the risks and the burdens of addressing the world's toughest problems.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
ROBERTSON: Well, Angela Merkel also offering her support, saying it's important to get a joint transatlantic plan of how to deal with China, of how to deal with Russia. Emmanuel Macron, the French President say look, we agree on all those shared values, those shared interests, sometimes their priorities might be a bit different, he said, but we can work together. That's the very clear message emerging at the end of the Munich Security Conference.
The message also for President Biden is not all European nations are perhaps going to go along with him as easily as perhaps he would like specifically on China and Russia too. So, not plain sailing but the United States, President Joe Biden back on the world stage leading as he wants to. Nic Robertson, CNN, London.
WHITFIELD: All right. New York Governor Andrew Cuomo's administration is being investigated for its handling of COVID-19 deaths in nursing homes. The State's Attorney General saying those deaths were under counted by as much as 50 percent. We'll talk about that next.
[13:32:43]
WHITFIELD: Facing a deepening crisis, New York Governor Andrew Cuomo now blaming, in part, misinformation as outrage grows over allegations his administration covered up the true number of COVID-19 deaths in nursing homes.
And even some fellow Democrats are joining calls for a full investigation into Governor Cuomo's handling of the crisis.
As Brian Todd reports, the scandal has also led to questions about the governor's personal behavior.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
BRIAN TODD, CNN CORRESPONDENT (voice-over): Andrew Cuomo's latest political battle has gotten intensely personal, with new accusations of intimidation against the New York governor.
GOV. BILL DE BLASIO (D), NEW YORK CITY: That's classic. A lot of people in New York State have received those phone calls.
The bullying is nothing new. The threats, the belittling, the demand that someone change their statement right that moment. Many, many times, I've heard and I know a lot of other people in the state have heard that.
TODD: In comments to NBC by Mayor Bill De Blasio, who has a longstanding contentious with Governor Cuomo, referred to a call Cuomo made recently to New York Assemblyman Ron Kim.
Kim, who has criticized Cuomo over a controversy involving nursing home deaths from COVID, says Cuomo threatened to destroy his career.
ASSEMBLYMAN RON KIM (D-NY): The berating, yelling and threatening that I have to issue a statement that invalidated what I heard. He asked me to lie to cover up for his staff.
And this was done in front of my family. He called me. My wife was next -- right next to me. I was right about to bathe my kids. And it really just put my family and my wife into shock and trauma.
TODD: Cuomo's office tells CNN Kim is lying about the conversation, that there was never a threat to destroy anyone.
Cuomo and his aides say Kim's acquisitions stem from their history.
GOV. ANDREW CUOMO (D-NY): I've had a -- my office, more than me, has had a long and hostile relationship with Assemblyman Ron Kim.
TODD: This New York-style political brawl stems from backlash Cuomo was getting over his handling of the pandemic.
A law enforcement official tells CNN the U.S. attorney's office in Brooklyn and the FBI are looking at the handling of data surrounding COVID-19 deaths in long-term care facilities in New York.
[13:35:06]
This comes after a top aide to Governor Cuomo admitted to state lawmakers that his administration delayed the release of that nursing home information because they were concerned the Trump administration would turn it into a political football.
It's not clear whether federal investigators are looking at Cuomo himself.
Cuomo's office says it's cooperating with the Justice Department and Cuomo addressed the crisis this week.
CUOMO: These decisions are not political decisions. They're all made on the best information the medical professionals have at the time.
TODD: A far cry from those dark early days of America's battle with coronavirus when Cuomo was looked on as a true national leader --
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Do you guys need a hand?
TODD: -- at a time few others were.
One analyst says Cuomo still enjoys high favorability ratings for his handling of the pandemic. But --
JON CAMPBELL, "USA TODAY" NETWORK'S NEW STATE TEAM: This is certainly among the biggest political crises the governor has faced since he's come into office, if not the biggest. The difference here is the attention that he's getting.
TODD: Asked by CNN to comment on Mayor De Blasio's remark he's a bully, Governor Cuomo's office didn't respond specifically to. But send us an email calling Assemblyman Ron Kim, quote, "unscrupulous."
Meanwhile, some New York lawmakers are calling for Cuomo to be stripped of his expanded emergency powers.
In Washington, some Republican Senators are calling on the Senate Judiciary Committee to investigate the nursing home controversy.
Brian Todd, CNN, Washington.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WHITFIELD: So the letter Brian Todd mentioned is from a handful of legislators who said, in their open letter to colleagues, that stripping the governor of his emergency powers was, I'm quoting now, "A necessary first step in beginning the right -- to right the criminal wrongdoings of his -- of this governor and his administration."
So with me now is Alessandra Biaggi, a Democratic state Senator from New York, and also the chair of THE Ethics and Internal Governance Committee in the state Senate.
She did not sign the letter but did sponsor the bill that would strip Governor Cuomo of his emergency powers.
State Senator Biaggi, did I get that right?
STATE SEN. ALESSANDRA BIAGGI (D-NY): That's correct.
WHITFIELD: OK. So what a difference six to eight months, you know, has made now. So much praise was heaped on Governor Cuomo for his handling and transparency and communicating with New Yorkers and really the world about COVID and now this kind of collective criticism, including, you know, what were once political allies. So are you -- were you among those heaping praise? And if so, or even if not, what was the breaking point for you?
BIAGGI: Well, I think that just to begin here, in the very beginning of the pandemic I think it's fair to say that there are things, and throughout some of the pandemic, there are things that the governor has done well and then there are things the governor has not done well.
And I think that the nursing home scandal and the undercounting and then the misleading of the public in terms of the numbers of deaths in nursing homes has been one of the things that the governor has not done well.
And so, yes, I was one of the people who felt that it was great to have somebody consistently share information on a regular basis, not only with New Yorkers, but with the entire country, at a time when we had a president who was really not interested in doing that. However, this is one of those examples of the governor's inability, frankly, just to be accountable to the public. And also just to be transparent about numbers.
Because in every disaster that has happened historically one of the things that people ask, whether it's a tornado, a pandemic, a hurricane, is how many people have died.
And specifically why we're asking about the numbers in nursing homes is because we know that that has been the most vulnerable population identified since the beginning of this pandemic.
We did not believe this was an inquiry that was unreasonable and so the fact that the numbers were withheld.
And then now we're in this moment where we have a political scandal on our hands in New York, it's just really disappointing.
WHITFIELD: So it wasn't enough for you to hear from him, that, yes there was misinformation and that, from his office, there was this admission that, at the time, there was a reluctance to release all the information out of fear that the Trump administration would use it against the New York governor, or New Yorkers as a whole.
That's not enough, I'm hearing from you, from that office?
BIAGGI: Not only is it not -- not only is it not enough. It's not acceptable to withhold information, number one, from the Department of Justice for any political reasons.
And any inquiry from the Department of Justice has to be taken seriously. And the numbers have to be shared and the information has to be shared immediately with a DOJ inquiry.
I think the thing that is perhaps the most controversial is the fact that his top aide, Melissa DeRosa, was in a closed-door meeting with legislators and said that the reason we didn't share those numbers is because we didn't know how they would be used against us as an administration.
[13:40:04]
That is incredibly troubling to hear. Why? Because 15,000 lives were lost. And behind every life lost is not only a family member, but a whole series of people who have been affected by this who deserve accountability, transparency in their government.
WHITFIELD: As a result, let me ask you more about the bill that you have helped craft. And this is to address the expanded emergency powers that the governor has. And you want a limitation on that.
BIAGGI: That's correct. So the bill that I introduced with Assembly Member Ron Kim is to repeal the governor's expanded emergency powers.
And just to be very clear, I have been calling for the removal of the DPRN's governor's expanded emergency powers now for months because of just the nature of the governor's directives and how they have really demonstrated an overreach of power that I believe is threatening to our co-equal branches of government.
For me, and for --
(CROSSTALK)
WHITFIELD: So you wanted these limitations -- so you wanted these limitations before this revelation about, you know, what the attorney general says the numbers are incorrect.
So what precipitated that? And how does this investigation that's happening right now, I guess, add fuel to your fire?
BIAGGI: Well, what precipitated that was the dozens and dozens of requests to have information shared with the legislature, which were the nursing home deaths, and the fact that there was a stonewalling of the legislature.
And really a closing off, almost, from the executive communication with us.
Not only did we send requests from the legislature to the executive but we had hearings in the summer where we asked the Department of Health commissioner, the very question, how many people died in nursing homes.
And they said to us over and over and over again we will share those numbers with you when we have them, which, frankly, is not acceptable. Again, we are a co-equal branch of government and deserve to have this information.
It's been something that's been going on months. It is, I think, not surprising it's kind of bubbled up to this point because many of us, myself, Assembly Member Ron Kim, have been banging this drum to say there's something going on here with the undercounting of nursing home deaths. I think the attorney general's report on January 28th was a really important moment, a turning point in the ability for us to have this information and to be able to have this information shared with us.
But again, this is something that's been going on behind the scenes for months.
WHITFIELD: All right, New York State Senator Alexandria Biaggi, thank you so much for your time. I really appreciate it.
BIAGGI: Thank you so much for having me.
WHITFIELD: Since the pandemic began last year, women have been driven out of the U.S. workforce in droves. Of the 10 million Americans who have lost their jobs, more than half are women. We'll talk about why and what is being done to help, next.
[13:47:28]
WHITFIELD: Vice President Kamala Harris is sounding the alarm about the number of women driven out of the workforce due to COVID-19.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
KAMALA HARRIS, VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES: Our economy cannot fully recover unless women can participate fully.
I think we all believe this is a national emergency. Women leaving the workforce in these numbers, it's a national emergency, and it demands a national solution.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WHITFIELD: The U.S. economy is currently down nearly 10 million jobs since the start of the pandemic. And over half of those, 5.3 million, were held by women.
CNN's Vanessa Yurkevich has more.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
BROOKE GASAWAY, UNEMPLOYED MOTHER: Look. Whoo!
VANESSA YURKEVICH, CNN BUSINESS & POLITICS CORRESPONDENT (voice over): It was supposed to be one of the happiest times of her life --
GASAWAY: Want to play our favorite game?
YURKEVICH: But when Brooke Gasaway was five months pregnant with her son, Luciano, she says she was laid off from her job.
GASAWAY: It was a lot of anxiety because I didn't know what was the best thing to do. YURKEVICH: Now that her son is six months old, she's looking for work again, but the economy she's facing is still down nearly 10 million jobs since the pandemic began, 5.3 million held by women.
GASAWAY: At this moment, sometimes I am scared to say I'm a mom when I'm applying. There's something about telling an employer that I'm going to be one of those people that -- that's going to have to balance those two things.
YURKEVICH: And 2.5 million women have left the workforce altogether, many who are mothers.
ALLISON ROBINSON, CEO AND CO-FOUNDER, THE MOM PROJECT: It has been, on so many fronts, such a challenging year for women. We've suffered more layoffs than men. And we've seen our already fragile childcare and education infrastructure unravel.
YURKEVICH: That very issue may have cost single mother, Nicole Conner, her job. She says she was fired because she could only work virtually. Her seven-year-old son, Atikis (ph), is at home remote learning.
She says they're surviving off food stamps and her student loans.
NICOLE CONNER, UNEMPLOYED MOTHER: I mean I'm lucky that my bills are paid during this time. But it's a sad concept that I have to be -- consider myself lucky to be able to go into debt and make sure my bills are paid.
YURKEVICH: Mother of four, Michelle Mitchom, is also looking for new work after she says she was laid off in July from a career in sales. The search has led her to apply for jobs she never considered before.
MICHELLE MITCHOM, UNEMPLOYED MOTHER: I've been applying for, I mean, any type of jobs. It doesn't matter if it's entry level, if it's, you know, internships, if it's janitorial. If it's anything, I've been applying.
[13:50:03]
YURKEVICH: President Joe Biden is proposing giving $15 billion in grants to working families to pay for childcare as part of his stimulus plan.
JOE BIDEN, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES: Enable parents, particularly women, to get back to work.
YURKEVICH: And some companies, like Spotify, Google and Facebook, are offering perks, like additional paid family leave or remote work from anywhere. Accenture is committing to hire 150 moms as a start.
GASAWAY: This is where I applied to jobs while my son takes naps.
YURKEVICH: The pandemic giving new meaning to work-life balance for mothers.
YURKEVICH (on camera): How are you feeling about your future? GASAWAY: I want to be something that makes my son proud and I think he would want me to continue pushing and, you know, continue trying to help other people and just be back in the workforce.
YURKEVICH (voice-over): Vanessa Yurkevich, CNN, Brooklyn, New York.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WHITFIELD: A short time ago, Prince Charles, overseas, was seen leaving a London hospital where his father, Prince Philip, is currently staying. The 99-year-old was admitted Tuesday evening as a precaution after feeling unwell. We'll talk about that, next.
[13:55:54]
WHITFIELD: Welcome back. A short time ago, Prince Charles was seen leaving a London hospital where his father, Prince Philip, is currently staying.
The 99-year-old was admitted Tuesday as a precautionary measure after feeling unwell, although he did walk into the hospital under his own power.
Britain's royal family is currently embroiled in a growing rift between the queen and her grandson, Prince Harry, over his separation from the family and his move to the United States with Meghan Markle.
Victoria Arbiter joining me. She is a CNN royal analyst and grew up around the royal family while her father was press secretary to Queen Elizabeth.
So good to see you.
So first off, what do we know about Prince Philip's condition?
VICTORIA ARBITER, CNN ROYAL ANALYST: Thank you for having me.
Yes, Prince Philip, as you mentioned, was admitted to King Edward VII Hospital last Tuesday. He was driven in a nonemergency fashion.
As you said, he walked into the hospital unaided. He's also 99 years old so, of course, there's concern when anyone is that age.
Generally speaking, royals don't tend to visit each other in hospital because they're very aware of the disruption it causes by their security detail and the police.
Given the lockdown situation in London as well, hospitals are operating under their own set of rules. The King Edward VII Hospital says there may be visits under exceptional circumstances.
So people are sensing that Prince Charles drove into London for a 40- minute visit with his father this afternoon. But according to the palace, Philip remains in good spirits. WHITFIELD: Of course, we're wishing him well.
This timing is something else, right, because it also comes on the heels of all these discussions about what is going on with Prince Harry, Meghan Markle, and their split with the royal family now.
The queen making it official yesterday that they will permanently, you know, be removed from royal duties.
So what's going on there? Especially when the queen seems to have made it really clear, maybe a year ago, saying, OK, he's still my near and dear, but I also respect that you want to think things through.
So now it's a big decision.
ARBITER: I think it's important to recognize here that this is all business. It's not personal. Harry and Meghan are not being punished with this final deal.
As you mentioned, last year, when the couple first announced they were planning to step away from the royal family, the queen said, let's just take a minute.
She wanted to be sure this wasn't just a reaction to the run of really difficult press that they had endured. They had intense media spotlight around the birth of their first child.
I think she wanted to give them a bit of breathing room to see what it is they wanted in the future.
We're now coming up on that 12-month period and the queen rightly went to them and said, OK, are you happy, what do you want to do?
It's very clear, on the endorsements that Harry and Meghan have secured over the last 12 months, the incredible businesses they've managed to affiliate themselves with, Netflix and Spotify, they have no intention to returning to the lives of a senior working royal.
So the items were finalized yesterday. Harry and Meghan have officially split from the royal family. And now the two parties go their separate ways.
WHITFIELD: What's your intel tell you? Independence -- that business independence, as well, OK, maybe really happy because it seems to be really, really lucrative.
But what do you know about how happy, particularly Prince Harry, really is? The idea of divorcing from your family. We get the royal duties, divorcing from that.
But is it also kind of interpreted as, you know, parting ways with the family that he has known, the only family he's known all his life?
ARBITER: I think it's been very difficult. It would be wrong to say that a lot of personal hurt hasn't been experienced by both parties.
Of course, the queen would have much rather Harry and Meghan had stayed as working members of the royal family.
They had an incredible reach. Meghan marrying into the royal family represented a whole new group of people.
And I think there was a lot of excitement, particularly in commonwealth countries, that as a biracial woman marrying into the royal family, that the royal family had finally been propelled into the 21st century.
[14:00:03]
So I think there was a lot of sadness that Harry and Meghan felt it was in their interests to leave.
I think it's also difficult for Harry to make his peace with his decision.
Load-Date: February 20, 2021



End of Document


AUSTIN/TRAVIS COUNTY OPENS 10 WATER DISTRIBUTION SITES
US Fed News
February 21, 2021 Sunday 9:31 AM  EST

Copyright 2021 HT Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Length: 282 words
Body




AUSTIN, Texas, Feb. 21 -- The city of Austin issued the following press release:
Today, February 21, Austin/Travis County will open 10 water distribution sites. The Austin Community College Pinnacle Campus location will begin distributing water at 9 a.m., the additional 9 sites will begin operating at 11a.m. All sites will provide free water on a first come, first served basis, while supplies last.
These sites are designated for our most vulnerable population without the ability to purchase or boil water.
Each pick up will include 1 case of water.
If you are driving a vehicle, we ask that you have your trunk open or have your doors unlocked so that volunteers can place water in your vehicle.
If you are on foot, we recommend that you bring a cart or carrier large enough to hold 1 case of water. With the increased use of bottled water, we ask residents to recycle all single-use plastic bottles and jugs instead of throwing them in the trash.
Austin Community College: Pinnacle Campus (7748 Highway 290 West, 78736)
Remember, Austin is still under a boil water notice and use restrictions. Water used for drinking, cooking, and brushing teeth should be boiled for two minutes before use.
Use restrictions are also in place to save water, and apply to both residents and businesses
Customers may not:
Violations of these restrictions should be reported to Austin 3-1-1.
Thank you for your support as we work to stabilize Austin's water plants. For more information on the boil notice and use restrictions, visit:http://austintexas.gov/page/boil-water-notice-and-faqs For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
Load-Date: February 22, 2021



End of Document


AUSTIN/TRAVIS COUNTY OPENS 10 WATER DISTRIBUTION SITES
US Fed News
February 21, 2021 Sunday 8:31 PM  EST

Copyright 2021 HT Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Length: 282 words
Body




AUSTIN, Texas, Feb. 21 -- The city of Austin issued the following press release:
Today, February 21, Austin/Travis County will open 10 water distribution sites. The Austin Community College Pinnacle Campus location will begin distributing water at 9 a.m., the additional 9 sites will begin operating at 11a.m. All sites will provide free water on a first come, first served basis, while supplies last.
These sites are designated for our most vulnerable population without the ability to purchase or boil water.
Each pick up will include 1 case of water.
If you are driving a vehicle, we ask that you have your trunk open or have your doors unlocked so that volunteers can place water in your vehicle.
If you are on foot, we recommend that you bring a cart or carrier large enough to hold 1 case of water. With the increased use of bottled water, we ask residents to recycle all single-use plastic bottles and jugs instead of throwing them in the trash.
Austin Community College: Pinnacle Campus (7748 Highway 290 West, 78736)
Remember, Austin is still under a boil water notice and use restrictions. Water used for drinking, cooking, and brushing teeth should be boiled for two minutes before use.
Use restrictions are also in place to save water, and apply to both residents and businesses
Customers may not:
Violations of these restrictions should be reported to Austin 3-1-1.
Thank you for your support as we work to stabilize Austin's water plants. For more information on the boil notice and use restrictions, visit:http://austintexas.gov/page/boil-water-notice-and-faqs For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
Load-Date: March 4, 2021



End of Document


AUSTIN/TRAVIS COUNTY OPENS 10 WATER DISTRIBUTION SITES FEBRUARY 21, 2021
States News Service
February 21, 2021 Sunday

Copyright 2021 States News Service
Length: 400 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: AUSTIN, TX 
Body




The following information was released by the City of Austin:
Today, February 21, Austin/Travis County will open 10 water distribution sites. The Austin Community College Pinnacle Campus location will begin distributing water at 9 a.m., the additional 9 sites will begin operating at 11a.m. All sites will provide free water on a first come, first served basis, while supplies last.
These sites are designated for our most vulnerable population without the ability to purchase or boil water.
Each pick up will include 1 case of water.
If you are driving a vehicle, we ask that you have your trunk open or have your doors unlocked so that volunteers can place water in your vehicle.
If you are on foot, we recommend that you bring a cart or carrier large enough to hold 1 case of water. With the increased use of bottled water, we ask residents to recycle all single-use plastic bottles and jugs instead of throwing them in the trash.
Distribution begins at 9 a.m. at the following site:
Austin Community College: Pinnacle Campus (7748 Highway 290 West, 78736)
Distribution begins at 11 a.m. at the following sites:
Nelson Field (7105 Berkman Dr., 78752)
Onion Creek Soccer Complex (5600 E. William Cannon Dr., 78744)
Roy G. Guerrero Park (400 Grove Blvd, 78741)
ACC Highland Mall Parking Lot (E. Highland Mall Blvd, 78752)
Garrison Park (6001 Menchaca Rd., 78745)
Lakeline Station (13625 Lyndhurst Blvd, 78717)
Walnut Creek Park (12138 N. Lamar Blvd, 78753)
Zilker Park (2301 Barton Springs Rd., 78746)
Anderson High School (8403 Mesa Dr., 78759)
Boil Water and Use Restrictions
Remember, Austin is still under a boil water notice and use restrictions. Water used for drinking, cooking, and brushing teeth should be boiled for two minutes before use.
Use restrictions are also in place to save water, and apply to both residents and businesses
Customers may not:
Use water for irrigation or testing of irrigation equipment
Wash vehicles, including at commercial car wash facilities
Wash pavement or other surfaces
Add water to a pool or spa
Conduct foundation watering, or
Operate an ornamental fountain or pond, other than aeration necessary to support aquatic life
Violations of these restrictions should be reported to Austin 3-1-1.
Thank you for your support as we work to stabilize Austins water plants. For more information on the boil notice and use restrictions, visit: http://austintexas.gov/page/boil-water-notice-and-faqs
Load-Date: February 21, 2021



End of Document


A third of Texans still have issues with their water supply after widespread power outages
CNN Wire
February 21, 2021 Sunday 7:55 PM GMT

Copyright 2021 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved
Length: 1090 words
Byline: By Eric Levenson, CNN
Dateline: (CNN) 
Body




             Water service remained disrupted for nearly a third of Texas residents Sunday evening, a lingering consequence of the widespread power outages from devastating winter weather and an unprepared infrastructure.
While that number decreased by several million over the course of the day, more than 1,200 public water systems still reported disruptions in service, with many leading to boil-water notices, according to Gary Rasp, media specialist for the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
The issues were still affecting more than 8.8 million people -- or roughly a third of the state's population of 29 million -- spread across 199 counties as of 7 p.m. (8 p.m. ET) Sunday. Rasp said 258 boil-water notices had been rescinded.
Houston announced Sunday afternoon it had lifted its boil-water notice effective immediately. "Water quality testing submitted to the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) has confirmed that tap water meets all regulatory standards and is safe to drink," the city said in a news release.
Galveston also lifted its boil-water notice midday Sunday and is removing water restrictions, according to a post on the city's Facebook page.
The water issues are part of the sprawling impacts of extensive blackouts: families forced to sleep in frigid homes and cars, scavenge for a hot meal, forgo medical treatment or use melted snow to flush the toilet.
At a news conference Sunday afternoon, Texas Gov. Greg Abbott said around 30,000 people remained without power in his state.
"Based upon the speed that I've seen power get restored, I suspect that all power will be fully restored across the state of Texas to every house either later tonight or tomorrow," Abbott said.
The governor said water services were being restored throughout Texas and that more than 3 million bottles of water had been distributed in an effort by the Texas National Guard, US Department of Defense and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
Warmer weather and the return of electricity has provided some relief for Texans, but many remain without clean water or in homes that have been damaged by broken pipes and flooding.
That includes Fort Worth Mayor Betsy Price, a Republican, who told CBS' "Face the Nation" on Sunday that her own home was flooded. She said her insurance will cover the damage, but that might not be the case for other Texans.
"At some point we're going to have to have additional plumbers and resources, but there's going to have to be dollars follow that to help these folks who don't have the ability to pay this themselves ... and that's going to have to come from the federal government," Price said.
During his news conference Sunday, Abbott said uninsured residents with burst pipes could qualify for a FEMA reimbursement.
"We have had FEMA assistance granted by the federal government, and a part of that is individual assistance that will assist individuals whose homes or apartments have been harmed because of the winter storm," he said.
Burst pipes and surprise electric bills
Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner, a Democrat, noted just how widespread the water issues are for many.
"Let me just say right now with so many homes across the city having pipes that burst because of the frigid weather and major leaks, major water damage, we need a lot of plumbing materials and supplies like right now," he said.
"We have a number of licensed plumbers but could use even more," Turner said. "But the main thing is that even when plumbers are going out, it is very difficult to find the necessary materials and supplies."
Additionally, some Texans are facing unprecedented price hikes in their energy bills as a result of the recent storm. Dallas resident DeAndre Upshaw said he got a $7,000 bill from his electric company, which charges customers at a market rate.
Texas' utility regulator, the Public Utility Commission of Texas, said Saturday it is investigating "the factors that combined with the devastating winter weather to disrupt the flow of power to millions of Texas homes."
Moratorium on disconnections
Abbott announced at his news conference Sunday that the state Public Utility Commission had issued a moratorium on customer disconnections for non-payment to address "skyrocketing energy bills" reportedly being faced by some Texans.
He said the commission would also restrict electricity providers from sending customer invoices at this time.
"Texans who have suffered through days of freezing cold without power should not be subjected to skyrocketing energy bills due to a spike in the energy market," Abbott said.
The governor said he held an emergency meeting with legislative leaders "to shield Texas families from unreasonable bills" due to the winter storms.
"This is something that's being fast-tracked, that legislators are working on as we speak. ... We will have meetings this week to get to the bottom of this but also to provide relief and support to our fellow Texans," Abbott said.
Asked about legislation to fix the power infrastructure in the state, Abbott said: "We will not end this session until the state of Texas is -- and all of its power generation capabilities -- is fully winterized."
In a later statement, the commission said it issued a series of orders "intended to protect Texas electricity customers while leaders in the state consider solutions for the financial aftershocks of the winter storm grid event."
As well as the moratorium, the commission ordered the continuation of a Covid-19 measure under which electricity providers are required to offer deferred payment plans to customers when requested.
It also "strongly urged" retail electric providers to delay invoicing for residential and small commercial electricity customers.
"The order and directives are intended to be temporary, likely through the end of this week, to address the potential financial impacts that are especially challenging during this extremely difficult time," said Chairman DeAnn Walker.
The winter weather also caused major delays in Covid-19 vaccinations across the country, but the backlog is just temporary, Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said Sunday.
"The number was six million doses got delayed, we've gotten two million out and we project that by the middle of the week, we will have caught up," Fauci told NBC's Chuck Todd.         
             CNN's Anjali Huynh, Chuck Johnston and Naomi Thomas contributed to this report.         
TM & © 2021 Cable News Network, Inc., a Time Warner Company. All rights reserved.
Load-Date: March 22, 2021



End of Document


Five Million Without Clean Water And Foods Across Hard Hit Texas
NBC News NBC NIGHTLY NEWS 7:00 PM EST
February 21, 2021 Sunday

Copyright 2021  ASC Services II Media, LLC
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2021 National Broadcasting Co. Inc.
Section: NEWS; Domestic
Length: 504 words
Byline: Kate Snow, Morgan Chesky
Highlight: Tonight, a Texas sized thaw flooding the state with one problem after another. Crews rushing to fix burst water lines. As many try to find emergency supplies. Gilbert Gomez, one of five million now forced to either boil or find bottled water. Tonight, Houston lifting their boil water notice as the capital city of Austin enters day five. Today the governor addressing another wide-spread problem.
Body




KATE SNOW (00:04:34): Now to our other big story. The desperation growing in Texas following those deadly winter storms millions are still without drinking water. Tonight the temperatures are finally rising but so is outrage over of absurdly high electric bills. Morgan Chesky reports from Dallas.
(Begin VT)
MORGAN CHESKY (00:04:52): Tonight, a Texas sized thaw flooding the state with one problem after another. Crews rushing to fix burst water lines. As many try to find emergency supplies.
GILBERT GOMEZ (Texas Resident) (00:05:03): It`s devastating, you know, we shouldn`t have to live like this, you know.
MORGAN CHESKY (00:05:07): Gilbert Gomez, one of five million now forced to either boil or find bottled water. Tonight, Houston lifting their boil water notice as the capital city of Austin enters day five. Today the governor addressing another wide-spread problem.
GOVERNOR GREG ABBOTT (R-Texas) (00:05:21): Texans who have suffered through days of freezing cold without power should not be subjected to skyrocketing energy bills due to-- due to a spike in the energy market.
MORGAN CHESKY (00:05:33): Now restricting energy companies from cutting off customers due to nonpayment essentially placing all bills on hold.
(00:05:40): This was the your-- this is the retirement home.
SCOTT WILLOUGHBY (Texas Resident) (00:05:41): Correct.
MORGAN CHESKY (00:05:43): But it could be too laid for this Texan like Scott Willoughby who signed up for Griddy energy after they advertise a whole sale prices, not knowing his rate could vary with the market. So when power supply went down from the storm. His typically two-hundred-dollar bill took off.
(00:05:59): When it was often done-- what was the damage?
SCOTT WILLOUGHBY (00:06:02): Sixteen thousand seven hundred ninety-eight dollars something like that.
MORGAN CHESKY (00:06:06): And this was not a bill. This was withdrawn?
SCOTT WILLOUGHBY (00:06:08): This was withdrawn straight from my account.
MORGAN CHESKY (00:06:11): As by the time the Vietnam vat could switch providers, he had already dipped into retirement savings.
SCOTT WILLOUGHBY (00:06:16): It`s been a bad situation and-- and the financial burden on top of just compounded.
MORGAN CHESKY (00:06:22): NBC News reached out to Griddy for comments, but has not heard back. Willoughby not alone joining millions of Texans in need of help. In Houston, some accepted water from Senator Ted Cruz who shared these photos just days after facing fierce backlash from a mid-freeze flight to Cancun. One famous Texan doing her part. Beyonce whose website now reads, if you are in Texas, you can apply for assistance.
(End VT)
KATE SNOW (00:06:49): And, Morgan joins us now from Dallas. Morgan, when will power be restored there?
MORGAN CHESKY (00:06:54): Yeah, Kate, some hopeful new tonight, Texas Governor Greg Abbott saying that about thirty thousand people statewide still without power. However, full restoration should happen either tonight or some time tomorrow. Kate.
KATE SNOW (00:07:07): That is good news. Morgan, thank you.
Load-Date: June 17, 2021



End of Document


WILCO WATER BRIGADE DISPATCHES 5,000 GALLONS TO HARD HIT COMMUNITIES
US Fed News
February 21, 2021 Sunday 12:01 PM  EST

Copyright 2021 HT Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Length: 392 words
Body




GEORGETOWN, Texas, Feb. 21 -- Williamson County issued the following news release:
When Williamson County's Office of Emergency Management learned that no water would be available again today for its communities that have been out of water for days or under a boil water notice, it formed its own water brigade to distribute water. In total, approximately 5,000 gallons of water were distributed. Water distribution sites will be open again on Sunday, February 21. To check locations and schedules, go to the website.
Starting late Friday night, the County's Emergency Response Team, which was activated for the winter storm on February 11, began identifying water tanks and trucks available in their inventory to carry water. Purchasing agents began looking for additional tanks in the area to buy.
Saturday morning, the vehicles were dispatched to locations in the City of Round Rock, the City of Georgetown and Southwest Williamson County Regional Park. Tanks were filled with potable water to be distributed in bulk. The cities coordinated the distribution sites. The City of Georgetown established water distribution to the areas of Liberty Hill and Florence in their service area. Residents were invited to bring their own containers to fill up with water.
In addition, Williamson County contacted Rentsch Brewery in Georgetown and Texas Beer Company in Taylor to can water for distribution. Rentsch Brewery packaged more than 10,000 cans of water. Texas Beer Company distributed 2,200 gallons to the public for them to fill with their own containers and packaged more than 8,400 cans of water. Some of those cans were given to area long-term care facilities that have been without water.
"This could not have been possible without our public-private partnerships. We cannot thank our county employees, the cities, Texas Beer Company and Rentsch Brewery enough for their contributions to bring water to our hardest hit areas," said Michael Shoe, Williamson County Emergency Management director.
"Every time our community faces adversity, it also responds with heroic deeds. Today's water distribution was such an event," said County Judge Bill Gravell. "I am overwhelmed by the outpouring of support that I witnessed today." For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
Load-Date: February 22, 2021



End of Document


Gov. Greg Abbott says power is almost fully restored statewide and grocery stores will soon be restocked
Newstex Blogs 
The Texas Tribune
February 21, 2021 Sunday 11:11 PM EST

Copyright 2021 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 444 words
Byline: Cassandra Pollock
Body




Feb 21, 2021( The Texas Tribune: http://texastribune.org Delivered by Newstex)  Sign up for The Brief[1], our daily newsletter that keeps readers up to speed on the most essential Texas news.  Gov. 
Greg Abbott[2] on Sunday said power should soon be fully restored across the state and that grocery stores will be restocked for Texans in the wake of a massive winter storm that left many without power for days. Abbott, speaking in San Antonio while flanked by other state and local leaders, said roughly 13,000 Texans still did not have power due to issues with local power providers. At its height, more than 4.5 million customers were without electricity. He said power should be fully restored across the state Sunday night or Monday.  Abbott also said food supply shortages at grocery stores would soon be resolved, now that road conditions are safe for deliveries. Abbott said he suspended state regulations to get more delivery trucks on roads to help deliver food and supplies at a faster rate. "There are so many Texans   too many Texans   that have gone hungry over the past few days," he said. Abbott also said he had also suspended regulations to allow kitchens to prepare more meals as long as they follow Texas Department of State Health Services guidelines on food safety. One issue still facing the state, Abbott said, is water quality as millions of people are still under boil notices or do not have access to running water. Toby Baker, executive director of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, said nearly 15 million residents were on a boil water notice 48 hours ago   and that since then about 5 million Texans had come off of such notices. Officials in the city of Houston, for example, announced Sunday afternoon that the city's tap water was safe again to use for drinking, cooking and making ice. Houston's boil notice had been in place since Wednesday.  During the news conference, Abbott also said he and other leaders were working overtime to address steep electricity bills that some Texans had received. On Sunday, the Public Utility Commission held an emergency meeting[3] to restrict electricity providers from sending customer invoices for the time being   a move aimed at giving the entity more time to address the spike in some bills. The commission also issued a moratorium on customer disconnections for nonpayment. [ 1]: https://www.texastribune.org/newsletters/the-brief/?utm_medium=website&#38;utm_source=trib-ads-owned&#38;utm_campaign=trib-marketing&#38;utm_term=inline-CTA-brief [ 2]: https://www.texastribune.org/directory/greg-abbott/ [ 3]: https://www.texastribune.org/2021/02/21/texas-electric-bill-greg-abbott/ 
Load-Date: February 21, 2021



End of Document



CITY OF AUSTIN AND TRAVIS COUNTY WINTER STORM RECOVERY OPERATIONS CONTINUED THROUGH SUNDAY
US Fed News
February 21, 2021 Sunday 8:31 PM  EST

Copyright 2021 HT Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Length: 1464 words
Body




AUSTIN, Texas, Feb. 21 -- The city of Austin issued the following press release:
Correction - 12:30 a.m, ACC Pinnacle Campus (7748 Highway 290 West, 78736) will also operate as a joint Austin-Travis County center for water distribution from 9 a.m. - 5 p.m..
The City will resume normal operations Monday morning.The Austin Parks and Recreation Department continues to assess winter storm damage to its facilities. All facilities will remain closed until thorough site inspections are complete; however, parks and trails remain open.&#8239;For the latest information, please visitaustintexas.gov/parkclosures.
Water DistributionSites
Community access to free water resources expandedon Sundaywith the opening of10 water distribution sitescoordinated by theAustin-Travis County Emergency Operations Center (A-TCEOC) at the following locations:
Nelson Field (7105 Berkman Dr., 78752)
Onion Creek Soccer Complex (5600 E. William Cannon Dr., 78744)
Roy G. Guerrero Park (400 Grove Blvd, 78741)
ACC Highland Mall Parking Lot (E. Highland Mall Blvd, 78752)
Garrison Park (6001 Menchaca Rd., 78745)
Lakeline Station (13625 Lyndhurst Blvd, 78717)
Walnut Creek Park (12138 N. Lamar Blvd, 78753)
Zilker Park (2301 Barton Springs Rd., 78746)
Anderson High School (8403 Mesa Dr., 78759)
As of 5 p.m.February 21, 2021, A-TCEOChaddistributed19,068 cases of water to the public distribution sites which is approximately 60,779gallons of water inapproximately 457,632bottles. The City will continue to updateinformation water distribution totalson the&#8239;Cold Weather and Information Resource&#8239;page&#8239;and on the City's social media pages.&#8239;&#8239;
Thefreewater distribution sites will re-open at 9a.m. Monday, Feb. 22 and close at 5 p.m.or until supplies last.
Residents arriving by personal vehicle are asked to have trunks open or doors unlocked for volunteers to keep lines moving quickly.
Cap Metro is providing transit service to the water distribution sites. Route and shuttle details are available on the Cap Metrowebsite. Fareson all routesare suspended through the end of the month.
Residents who will be walking to sites to pick up water are reminded to bring a wheeled cart or carrier that is at least strong enough to carry a case of water which is approximately 30 pounds.
Residents are remindedto recycle all single-use plastic bottles and jugs instead of throwing them in the trash.
Food Distribution
Before this weather emergency, manyAustin residents experienced food insecurity.The COVID pandemiccompoundedthat insecurity andthis historic storm eventcausedfood insecurity in Austintoskyrocket.Like so many communities,Austin relies on a network of organizations to provide food to our community, including grocery stores and non-profit organizations. With improving weather conditions, the City of Austin and Travis County are working diligently to ensure that our critical partner in providing food to our community can restart operations tomorrow, including the Central Texas Food Bank, Meals on Wheels, area Independent School Districts, and area grocers.
The Austin community is like no other.Thanks toinnumerable organizations like Austin Disaster Relief Network,Community Resiliency Trust, Cooks Nook, Keep Austin Fed,Good Works, and Austin Voices, thousands of Austinites have received mealsthrough mass food distribution efforts and home delivery programs. Additionally, thousands of individual restaurants have provided free food pick ups to area residents.
To supplement these efforts, Austin/Travis County Emergency Management secured approximately 25,000 ready to heat meals from the Red Cross and, in partnership with local organizations, will be implementing a variety of strategies including establishing a mass food distribution site and continuing to offer delivery to homebound individuals.
Water Utility Restoration&#8239;&#8239;&#8239;
Austin Water is reporting continued improvement in pressure in the City water distribution system. A minimum of 100 million gallons in storage is needed to help build pressure system-wide. Storage was at90 million gallons and rising as of 5 p.m. on February 21, 2021.
Customers with water serviceare encouraged to continuelimitingwater use to essential needs so thatwater servicecan returnto all customers more quickly.Residents are urged totake short showersanddelayusing washing machines to wash clothes and dishes.Additionally, the City's mandatory water conservation measures remain in effect. As a reminder, during water use restrictions customers may not:
Use water for irrigation or testing of irrigation equipment&#8239;
Wash vehicles, including at commercial car wash facilities&#8239;
Wash pavement or other surfaces&#8239;
Add water to a pool or spa&#8239;
Conduct foundation watering, or&#8239;
Operate an ornamental fountain or pond, other than aeration necessary to support aquatic life&#8239;
Violations of these restrictions should be reported to Austin 3-1-1.
Please continue to report leaks in your neighborhood using the&#8239;online issue report form.&#8239;&#8239;
Boil Water Notice&#8239;&#8239;
The Boil Water Notice for Austin remains in effect andcustomers shouldcontinueto boil water for drinking,cooking,and brushing teeth for at least two minutesuntil further notice. For more information about FAQ's go to&#8239;austinwater.org.&#8239;&#8239;
Austin Energy Restoration&#8239;&#8239;
Austin Energy (AE) has&#8239;restored power to more than 99%&#8239;of its customers who lost service during the recent storms. Information on remaining outages can be found on the&#8239;Austin Energy Outage Map. Customers experiencing an outage that is not shown on the outage map are encouraged please report it by calling512-322-9100.
Recovery Assistance
The&#8239;extended Winter Weather Event order&#8239;and&#8239;disaster declaration for Austin&#8239;remain in effect to minimize energy demand and ensure the community can continue to tap into every resource available to persevere through this crisis.&#8239;&#8239;
FEMA assistance available for severe winter storm
The Federal Emergency Management Agency(FEMA)has opened assistance for those who were impacted by the winter severe weather in Travis County.
Residents can apply for assistance in the following ways:
Uninsured: Apply online athttp://DisasterAssistance.gov.
Insured: File a claim with their insurance company andthen apply to FEMA. FEMA cannot duplicate benefits if you received insurance from your provider first.
Home Repair Assistance
The Housing and Planning Department's&#8239;home repair program&#8239;can assist eligible homeowners who need repairs following therecent storms.
The Housing and Planning Department's priority will be to mobilize resources to address the needs oflow- to moderate-income homeowners seeking much-needed resources.
The Housing and Planning Department is working closely with the Development Services Department and leveraging other City resourcesto provide an efficient response as possible for households seeking repairs.&#8239;
Information related to home repairs for eligible homeowners will be posted and updated on this website the week of February 22. To learn more about the City's home repair programs and assistance to qualifying households, visit the&#8239;home repair program webpage.&#8239;&#8239;
Volunteer Information&#8239;
There continues to be much interest in helping those in need during the winter storm crisis. The City of Austin created a&#8239;Winter Storm Volunteer sign up form&#8239;for those to sign up to help.&#8239;
So far, we have received contact information from 1600+ interested volunteers who can play a critical role in addressing both immediate and long-term needs. The volunteer form signs-up residents to receive alerts so they may sign up for volunteer opportunities as they arise. Currently this includes shelter and travel support but will be expanded for clean-up efforts and more.&#8239;
Volunteers can visit this webpage:&#8239;https://www.austintexas.gov/help-atx-winter&#8239;for information on how to get involved. They can sign up for volunteer opportunities and fill out the volunteer form from there to receive alerts. This page was developed in partnership with Austin Disaster Relief Network and Travis County and will continue to list opportunities developed by both groups as well as the City of Austin.&#8239;
AdditionalCity Resources and Information&#8239;
Individuals who are looking for available City and County resources, as well as other community resources can visit&#8239;austintexas.gov/weatherinfo&#8239;or&#8239;austintexas.gov/infoclimatica&#8239;for Spanish. City and County departments will also continue to provide updates on social media channels. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
Load-Date: March 4, 2021



End of Document


Critics Accuse Ted Cruz of 'Fake Compassion' As He Hands Out Water After Mexico Trip
Newsweek.com
February 21, 2021 Sunday 5:34 AM EST

Copyright © 2021 Newsweek Inc. All Rights Reserved

Length: 450 words
Byline: Matt Cannon
Highlight: Pictures posted on his official Twitter account showed the lawmaker handing out bottles of water in Texas, two days after returning to the disaster-hit state.
Body




Fresh from a trip to a Mexican beach resort, Texas Senator Ted Cruz appeared keen to show he was helping others during the statewide emergency that hetemporarily—left behind this week.
The Republican lawmaker has been under fire over his decision to fly to Cancun as a winter storm—and a creaking power grid—left millions without electricity and latterly without drinking water throughout the state.
Two days after he admitted his "mistake" and flew home, new pictures of Cruz were posted on his official Twitter account.
In them, Cruz—sleeves rolled-up and wearing a Texas flag face—was handing out bottles of water to those in need. The photos came captioned "#TexasStrong."
But some commentators to suggest Cruz's gesture appeared somewhat hollow.
Writer Melissa Ryan, a former digital strategist for Democratic campaigns, accused Cruz of showing "fake compassion."
"I'm glad someone in Ted Cruz's Senate office finally instructed him on how to fake compassion, humanity, and creating the illusion that he cares about the people he was elected to serve," she wrote.
Lawyer Bradley Moss, suggested Cruz would still rather be in Cancun.
CNN analyst Jessica Huseman, noted official guidelines on returning from a trip abroad. "Stay home and self-quarantine for a full 7 days after travel," the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention advises.
While TV personality Keith Olbermann quipped: "I assume you're taking these waters."
Democrats have also been keen to promote their own efforts via social media.
Beto O'Rourke, who narrowly lost to Cruz in their 2018 race for the Senate, has been helping organize emergency supplies and check-in calls with residents.
Others, such as New York representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, have been tweeting about their fundraising efforts.
"Charity isn't a replacement for good governance," AOC tweeted earlier this week. "But we won't turn away from helping people in need when things hit the fan."
Cruz said on Friday that the Mexico trip was "obviously a mistake," and that he had been accompanying his daughters on a vacation with their friends.
In a later sympathetic interview with Fox News' Hannity, Cruz was later asked about the "quick drop-off trip" to Mexico.
"I'd initially planned to stay through weekend and to work remotely there," Cruz said.
"But as I was heading down there, you know, I started to have second thoughts almost immediately, because the crisis here in Texas, you need to be here on the ground.
"And as much as you can do by phone and by Zoom it's not the same as being here."
Power has been restored to most Texas homes affected by the power outages, however, nearly half of the state's population are still under boil water notices.
Link to Image
Graphic



 
Cruz at Cancun International Airport
MEGA/GC Images
Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX) checks in for a flight at Cancun International Airport after a backlash over his Mexican family vacation as his home state of Texas endured a winter storm on February 18, 2021 in Cancun, Quintana Roo, Mexico.
Load-Date: February 21, 2021



End of Document


CITY OF AUSTIN AND TRAVIS COUNTY WINTER STORM RECOVERY OPERATIONS CONTINUED THROUGH SUNDAY
US Fed News
February 21, 2021 Sunday 9:31 AM  EST

Copyright 2021 HT Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Length: 1464 words
Body




AUSTIN, Texas, Feb. 21 -- The city of Austin issued the following press release:
Correction - 12:30 a.m, ACC Pinnacle Campus (7748 Highway 290 West, 78736) will also operate as a joint Austin-Travis County center for water distribution from 9 a.m. - 5 p.m..
The City will resume normal operations Monday morning.The Austin Parks and Recreation Department continues to assess winter storm damage to its facilities. All facilities will remain closed until thorough site inspections are complete; however, parks and trails remain open.&#8239;For the latest information, please visitaustintexas.gov/parkclosures.
Water DistributionSites
Community access to free water resources expandedon Sundaywith the opening of10 water distribution sitescoordinated by theAustin-Travis County Emergency Operations Center (A-TCEOC) at the following locations:
Nelson Field (7105 Berkman Dr., 78752)
Onion Creek Soccer Complex (5600 E. William Cannon Dr., 78744)
Roy G. Guerrero Park (400 Grove Blvd, 78741)
ACC Highland Mall Parking Lot (E. Highland Mall Blvd, 78752)
Garrison Park (6001 Menchaca Rd., 78745)
Lakeline Station (13625 Lyndhurst Blvd, 78717)
Walnut Creek Park (12138 N. Lamar Blvd, 78753)
Zilker Park (2301 Barton Springs Rd., 78746)
Anderson High School (8403 Mesa Dr., 78759)
As of 5 p.m.February 21, 2021, A-TCEOChaddistributed19,068 cases of water to the public distribution sites which is approximately 60,779gallons of water inapproximately 457,632bottles. The City will continue to updateinformation water distribution totalson the&#8239;Cold Weather and Information Resource&#8239;page&#8239;and on the City's social media pages.&#8239;&#8239;
Thefreewater distribution sites will re-open at 9a.m. Monday, Feb. 22 and close at 5 p.m.or until supplies last.
Residents arriving by personal vehicle are asked to have trunks open or doors unlocked for volunteers to keep lines moving quickly.
Cap Metro is providing transit service to the water distribution sites. Route and shuttle details are available on the Cap Metrowebsite. Fareson all routesare suspended through the end of the month.
Residents who will be walking to sites to pick up water are reminded to bring a wheeled cart or carrier that is at least strong enough to carry a case of water which is approximately 30 pounds.
Residents are remindedto recycle all single-use plastic bottles and jugs instead of throwing them in the trash.
Food Distribution
Before this weather emergency, manyAustin residents experienced food insecurity.The COVID pandemiccompoundedthat insecurity andthis historic storm eventcausedfood insecurity in Austintoskyrocket.Like so many communities,Austin relies on a network of organizations to provide food to our community, including grocery stores and non-profit organizations. With improving weather conditions, the City of Austin and Travis County are working diligently to ensure that our critical partner in providing food to our community can restart operations tomorrow, including the Central Texas Food Bank, Meals on Wheels, area Independent School Districts, and area grocers.
The Austin community is like no other.Thanks toinnumerable organizations like Austin Disaster Relief Network,Community Resiliency Trust, Cooks Nook, Keep Austin Fed,Good Works, and Austin Voices, thousands of Austinites have received mealsthrough mass food distribution efforts and home delivery programs. Additionally, thousands of individual restaurants have provided free food pick ups to area residents.
To supplement these efforts, Austin/Travis County Emergency Management secured approximately 25,000 ready to heat meals from the Red Cross and, in partnership with local organizations, will be implementing a variety of strategies including establishing a mass food distribution site and continuing to offer delivery to homebound individuals.
Water Utility Restoration&#8239;&#8239;&#8239;
Austin Water is reporting continued improvement in pressure in the City water distribution system. A minimum of 100 million gallons in storage is needed to help build pressure system-wide. Storage was at90 million gallons and rising as of 5 p.m. on February 21, 2021.
Customers with water serviceare encouraged to continuelimitingwater use to essential needs so thatwater servicecan returnto all customers more quickly.Residents are urged totake short showersanddelayusing washing machines to wash clothes and dishes.Additionally, the City's mandatory water conservation measures remain in effect. As a reminder, during water use restrictions customers may not:
Use water for irrigation or testing of irrigation equipment&#8239;
Wash vehicles, including at commercial car wash facilities&#8239;
Wash pavement or other surfaces&#8239;
Add water to a pool or spa&#8239;
Conduct foundation watering, or&#8239;
Operate an ornamental fountain or pond, other than aeration necessary to support aquatic life&#8239;
Violations of these restrictions should be reported to Austin 3-1-1.
Please continue to report leaks in your neighborhood using the&#8239;online issue report form.&#8239;&#8239;
Boil Water Notice&#8239;&#8239;
The Boil Water Notice for Austin remains in effect andcustomers shouldcontinueto boil water for drinking,cooking,and brushing teeth for at least two minutesuntil further notice. For more information about FAQ's go to&#8239;austinwater.org.&#8239;&#8239;
Austin Energy Restoration&#8239;&#8239;
Austin Energy (AE) has&#8239;restored power to more than 99%&#8239;of its customers who lost service during the recent storms. Information on remaining outages can be found on the&#8239;Austin Energy Outage Map. Customers experiencing an outage that is not shown on the outage map are encouraged please report it by calling512-322-9100.
Recovery Assistance
The&#8239;extended Winter Weather Event order&#8239;and&#8239;disaster declaration for Austin&#8239;remain in effect to minimize energy demand and ensure the community can continue to tap into every resource available to persevere through this crisis.&#8239;&#8239;
FEMA assistance available for severe winter storm
The Federal Emergency Management Agency(FEMA)has opened assistance for those who were impacted by the winter severe weather in Travis County.
Residents can apply for assistance in the following ways:
Uninsured: Apply online athttp://DisasterAssistance.gov.
Insured: File a claim with their insurance company andthen apply to FEMA. FEMA cannot duplicate benefits if you received insurance from your provider first.
Home Repair Assistance
The Housing and Planning Department's&#8239;home repair program&#8239;can assist eligible homeowners who need repairs following therecent storms.
The Housing and Planning Department's priority will be to mobilize resources to address the needs oflow- to moderate-income homeowners seeking much-needed resources.
The Housing and Planning Department is working closely with the Development Services Department and leveraging other City resourcesto provide an efficient response as possible for households seeking repairs.&#8239;
Information related to home repairs for eligible homeowners will be posted and updated on this website the week of February 22. To learn more about the City's home repair programs and assistance to qualifying households, visit the&#8239;home repair program webpage.&#8239;&#8239;
Volunteer Information&#8239;
There continues to be much interest in helping those in need during the winter storm crisis. The City of Austin created a&#8239;Winter Storm Volunteer sign up form&#8239;for those to sign up to help.&#8239;
So far, we have received contact information from 1600+ interested volunteers who can play a critical role in addressing both immediate and long-term needs. The volunteer form signs-up residents to receive alerts so they may sign up for volunteer opportunities as they arise. Currently this includes shelter and travel support but will be expanded for clean-up efforts and more.&#8239;
Volunteers can visit this webpage:&#8239;https://www.austintexas.gov/help-atx-winter&#8239;for information on how to get involved. They can sign up for volunteer opportunities and fill out the volunteer form from there to receive alerts. This page was developed in partnership with Austin Disaster Relief Network and Travis County and will continue to list opportunities developed by both groups as well as the City of Austin.&#8239;
AdditionalCity Resources and Information&#8239;
Individuals who are looking for available City and County resources, as well as other community resources can visit&#8239;austintexas.gov/weatherinfo&#8239;or&#8239;austintexas.gov/infoclimatica&#8239;for Spanish. City and County departments will also continue to provide updates on social media channels. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
Load-Date: February 23, 2021



End of Document


CITY OF AUSTIN AND TRAVIS COUNTY WINTER STORM RECOVERY OPERATIONS CONTINUED THROUGH SUNDAY
States News Service
February 21, 2021 Sunday

Copyright 2021 States News Service
Length: 1426 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: AUSTIN, TX 
Body




The following information was released by the City of Austin:
Correction - 12:30 a.m, ACC Pinnacle Campus (7748 Highway 290 West, 78736) will also operate as a joint Austin-Travis County center for water distribution from 9 a.m. 5 p.m..
The City will resume normal operations Monday morning. The Austin Parks and Recreation Department continues to assess winter storm damage to its facilities. All facilities will remain closed until thorough site inspections are complete; however, parks and trails remain open.&#8239;For the latest information, please visit austintexas.gov/parkclosures.
Water Distribution Sites
Community access to free water resources expanded on Sunday with the opening of 10 water distribution sites coordinated by the Austin-Travis County Emergency Operations Center (A-TCEOC) at the following locations:
Onion Creek Soccer Complex (5600 E. William Cannon Dr., 78744)
Roy G. Guerrero Park (400 Grove Blvd, 78741)
ACC Highland Mall Parking Lot (E. Highland Mall Blvd, 78752)
Garrison Park (6001 Menchaca Rd., 78745)
Lakeline Station (13625 Lyndhurst Blvd, 78717)
Walnut Creek Park (12138 N. Lamar Blvd, 78753)
Zilker Park (2301 Barton Springs Rd., 78746)
Anderson High School (8403 Mesa Dr., 78759)
As of 5 p.m. February 21, 2021, A-TCEOC had distributed 19,068 cases of water to the public distribution sites which is approximately 60,779 gallons of water in approximately 457,632 bottles. The City will continue to update information water distribution totals on the&#8239;Cold Weather and Information Resource&#8239;page&#8239;and on the Citys social media pages.&#8239;&#8239;
The free water distribution sites will re-open at 9 a.m. Monday, Feb. 22 and close at 5 p.m. or until supplies last.
Residents arriving by personal vehicle are asked to have trunks open or doors unlocked for volunteers to keep lines moving quickly.
Cap Metro is providing transit service to the water distribution sites. Route and shuttle details are available on the Cap Metro website. Fares on all routes are suspended through the end of the month.
Residents who will be walking to sites to pick up water are reminded to bring a wheeled cart or carrier that is at least strong enough to carry a case of water which is approximately 30 pounds.
Residents are reminded to recycle all single-use plastic bottles and jugs instead of throwing them in the trash.
Food Distribution
Before this weather emergency, many Austin residents experienced food insecurity. The COVID pandemic compounded that insecurity and this historic storm event caused food insecurity in Austin to skyrocket. Like so many communities, Austin relies on a network of organizations to provide food to our community, including grocery stores and non-profit organizations. With improving weather conditions, the City of Austin and Travis County are working diligently to ensure that our critical partner in providing food to our community can restart operations tomorrow, including the Central Texas Food Bank, Meals on Wheels, area Independent School Districts, and area grocers.
The Austin community is like no other. Thanks to innumerable organizations like Austin Disaster Relief Network, Community Resiliency Trust, Cooks Nook, Keep Austin Fed, Good Works, and Austin Voices, thousands of Austinites have received meals through mass food distribution efforts and home delivery programs. Additionally, thousands of individual restaurants have provided free food pick ups to area residents.
To supplement these efforts, Austin/Travis County Emergency Management secured approximately 25,000 ready to heat meals from the Red Cross and, in partnership with local organizations, will be implementing a variety of strategies including establishing a mass food distribution site and continuing to offer delivery to homebound individuals.
Water Utility Restoration&#8239;&#8239;&#8239;
Austin Water is reporting continued improvement in pressure in the City water distribution system. A minimum of 100 million gallons in storage is needed to help build pressure system-wide. Storage was at 90 million gallons and rising as of 5 p.m. on February 21, 2021.
Customers with water service are encouraged to continue limiting water use to essential needs so that water service can return to all customers more quickly. Residents are urged to take short showers and delay using washing machines to wash clothes and dishes. Additionally, the Citys mandatory water conservation measures remain in effect. As a reminder, during water use restrictions customers may not:
Use water for irrigation or testing of irrigation equipment&#8239;
Wash vehicles, including at commercial car wash facilities&#8239;
Wash pavement or other surfaces&#8239;
Add water to a pool or spa&#8239;
Conduct foundation watering, or&#8239;
Violations of these restrictions should be reported to Austin 3-1-1.
Please continue to report leaks in your neighborhood using the&#8239;online issue report form.&#8239;&#8239;
Boil Water Notice&#8239;&#8239;
The Boil Water Notice for Austin remains in effect and customers should continue to boil water for drinking, cooking, and brushing teeth for at least two minutes until further notice. For more information about FAQ's go to&#8239;austinwater.org.&#8239;&#8239;
Austin Energy Restoration&#8239;&#8239;
Austin Energy (AE) has&#8239;restored power to more than 99%&#8239;of its customers who lost service during the recent storms. Information on remaining outages can be found on the&#8239;Austin Energy Outage Map. Customers experiencing an outage that is not shown on the outage map are encouraged please report it by calling 512-322-9100.
Recovery Assistance
The&#8239;extended Winter Weather Event order&#8239;and&#8239;disaster declaration for Austin&#8239;remain in effect to minimize energy demand and ensure the community can continue to tap into every resource available to persevere through this crisis.&#8239;&#8239;
FEMA assistance available for severe winter storm
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has opened assistance for those who were impacted by the winter severe weather in Travis County.
Residents can apply for assistance in the following ways:
Uninsured: Apply online at http://DisasterAssistance.gov.
Insured: File a claim with their insurance company and then apply to FEMA. FEMA cannot duplicate benefits if you received insurance from your provider first.
Home Repair Assistance
The Housing and Planning Departments&#8239;home repair program&#8239;can assist eligible homeowners who need repairs following the recent storms.
The Housing and Planning Departments priority will be to mobilize resources to address the needs of low- to moderate-income homeowners seeking much-needed resources.
The Housing and Planning Department is working closely with the Development Services Department and leveraging other City resources to provide an efficient response as possible for households seeking repairs.&#8239;
Information related to home repairs for eligible homeowners will be posted and updated on this website the week of February 22. To learn more about the Citys home repair programs and assistance to qualifying households, visit the&#8239;home repair program webpage.&#8239;&#8239;
Volunteer Information&#8239;
There continues to be much interest in helping those in need during the winter storm crisis. The City of Austin created a&#8239;Winter Storm Volunteer sign up form&#8239;for those to sign up to help.&#8239;
So far, we have received contact information from 1600+ interested volunteers who can play a critical role in addressing both immediate and long-term needs. The volunteer form signs-up residents to receive alerts so they may sign up for volunteer opportunities as they arise. Currently this includes shelter and travel support but will be expanded for clean-up efforts and more.&#8239;
Volunteers can visit this webpage:&#8239;https://www.austintexas.gov/help-atx-winter&#8239;for information on how to get involved. They can sign up for volunteer opportunities and fill out the volunteer form from there to receive alerts. This page was developed in partnership with Austin Disaster Relief Network and Travis County and will continue to list opportunities developed by both groups as well as the City of Austin.&#8239;
Additional City Resources and Information&#8239;
Individuals who are looking for available City and County resources, as well as other community resources can visit&#8239;austintexas.gov/weatherinfo&#8239;or&#8239;austintexas.gov/infoclimatica&#8239;for Spanish. City and County departments will also continue to provide updates on social media channels.
Load-Date: February 22, 2021



End of Document


What a Texas Plumber Faces Now: A State Full of Burst Pipes
The New York Times 
February 21, 2021 Sunday 12:48 EST

Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1371 words
Byline: Allyson Waller and Mark Felix
Highlight: Since a winter storm and hard freeze swept through the state last week, knocking out power and heat, homeowners have swamped plumbers with urgent repair calls.
Body




Since a winter storm and hard freeze swept through the state last week, knocking out power and heat, homeowners have swamped plumbers with urgent repair calls.
HOUSTON — Randy Calazans is one of the hottest commodities in Texas right now. He’s a plumber.
The winter weather nightmare that swept through the state last week cut off power and heat to millions of homes that were never designed for frigid temperatures. Up and down the state, people were driven from their homes, or came back to find them badly damaged, by pipes and valves and tanks that froze and burst.
So when the snow started to defrost and the sun made a coveted return, plumbers were suddenly like roofers after a hurricane: Everybody seemed to need one, all at once.
At One Call Plumbing, the plumbing business where Mr. Calazans works, employees have been answering the phones nonstop in a small office with sprawling maps of Houston on the walls. The owner, Edgar Connery, said he had been in the business for nearly 40 years and had never seen a crush like this after other natural disasters. Some other companies had gotten so swamped that they stopped answering the phone at all.
Mr. Calazans returned to work in the field on Thursday, going from one customer’s house to another, mainly to size up the damage. Simple problems he repairs on the spot if he can. But some houses will need major work, and may even have to be re-piped completely; those must be left for the weeks ahead.
Obtaining the materials to get even the simple jobs done is a growing problem, Mr. Calazans said: Waiting in line at a supply house could tie him up for hours, but when he tried picking up a few things at Home Depot, the shelves were bare.
“I’m literally just burning through supplies,” he said.
With power largely restored and temperatures back to the more seasonable 60s and 70s, Texans continued to grapple on Sunday with the state’s continuing water crisis. Some reservoirs in the state were refilling again after nearly being drained by all of the burst water mains, leaking pipes, and faucets that were left running to keep from freezing.
Austin was still under a boil-water notice as pressure gradually built back up toward normal in its water system, which was knocked out by the power failures. Austin Water said in a statement on Sunday that once pressure was restored, the water would have to be tested before being deemed safe to drink, which can take several days.
Houston had restored pressure to its system by Sunday morning, and lifted its boil-water notice in the afternoon.
The full magnitude of the damage left behind by the cold snap is still emerging, but the state already knows it needs more plumbers in a hurry. Gov. Greg Abbott’s office has said that the state will grant provisional licenses to out-of-state plumbers and will waive fees and certain other requirements for plumbers with lapsed licenses who want to renew them.
Mr. Calazans, 35, stressed the importance of having repair work handled by a qualified professional, even in the aftermath of a disaster. He recalled with disgust some of the dodgy, off-the-books work he had come across over the years.
“You don’t just want anybody doing plumbing,” he said.
He has more experience with hard winter weather than many Texans. He and his wife moved to the Houston area last June from Long Island, seeking greater opportunity than they saw in the locked-down New York suburbs.
But Mr. Calazans did not escape damage of his own in Texas: A water line broke in his garage, he said, pretty much flooding the space and damaging his gym equipment.
When he got to Jared Coyle’s house in the Cinco Ranch area of Houston around noon on Friday, debris and insulation sat in a compact pile by the garage. Pipes had burst in the house, damaging several areas, including his daughter’s room and the laundry room.
For Mr. Coyle, Mr. Calazans represented salvation. The plumber, who had first visited the house on Thursday, was returning with more supplies in hand to complete the repair.
“These homes are not built for the cold down here, and things were not prepared for the extreme cold,” said Mr. Coyle, who moved to Houston about 17 years ago. “There’s only so much you can do before you just say, ‘It is what it is, we’ll just deal with what happens and we’ll move forward.’ That’s all you can do.”
After major storm systems hit Texas, most of the damage is usually concentrated in urban areas like Houston and Dallas, according to Chris Pilcic, a spokesman for State Farm Insurance based in Texas. But this time, he said, it’s everywhere.
As of Friday, State Farm had received about 18,900 property claims from customers in Texas, most of them related to frozen and broken water pipes, he said.
“With this, we’re hearing from customers across the state,” Mr. Pilcic said. “There isn’t one area that hasn’t been affected.”
And it’s not just Texas: More than 2,100 claims had come in from Louisiana, he said, and hundreds more from other states in the path of the storm like Oklahoma, Arkansas, Mississippi and Tennessee.
Lisa Gochman, another Houston resident on Mr. Calazans’ list for Friday, said the portable electric lanterns she bought for hurricane season came in handy when the power went out last week in her two-bedroom condo — that is, until a water leak collapsed part of the ceiling in her guest room, leaving the bed completely covered in rubble.
“It’s a hot mess,” she said. “It’s unlivable.”
Leaks also appeared in her bathroom and kitchen, she said, and the condo had neither power nor water. So she resorted to couch-surfing for shelter, hoping to eventually move to a hotel or a short-term rental.
“I’m trying to just kind of go with it,” said Ms. Gochman, who has lived in the condo for close to 11 years. “I’ve cried a couple times.”
Before reaching One Call Plumbing, she said, the earliest availability she could find online for a plumber to come was April 22.
After climbing through Ms. Gochman’s closet to look into the attic, Mr. Calazans said it was possible that there were even more leaks, but he would not be able to tell until her water was turned back on. It night be necessary to re-pipe the whole place, he said, at a cost of about $10,000.
Ms. Gochman said she was expecting a figure like that, but was not sure how much her insurance would cover.
“That’s not even to fix my place up,” Ms. Gochman said. “I still have to do carpet, fix the wall. It’s probably going to be $20,000 to $30,000 all together.”
Mr. Calazans said it was not unusual to arrive at a job expecting to tackle a minor problem, only to discover that much more was wrong. That’s what happened at one house in the Bellaire section on Friday afternoon: One burst pipe revealed another, and then more leaks in a pipe encased in a stucco column. He couldn’t get all of that done in the one visit, after all; he would have to come back another day.
He said he expected life to be like that for him for weeks to come: one long 10-hour workday after another, filled with repairs on top of repairs on top of repairs.
“It’s the nature of the business,” he said.
Lucy Tompkins contributed reporting.
Lucy Tompkins contributed reporting. 
PHOTOS: Randy Calazans, a 35-year-old plumber in Houston, has been working 10-hour days sizing up the damage at customers’ houses. The business he works for has received hundreds of calls a day.; Clockwise from left, Mr. Calazans carrying PEX pipes; checking the water pressure in a customer’s home; and looking for leaks from an attic. He is repairing minor problems right away, but he has to leave some major re-piping work for the weeks ahead. It has been a challenge to secure the materials he needs. “I’m literally just burning through supplies,” he said. (A14); Above, a map at One Call Houston shows the many requests for repairs in the area, where many homes that were not winterized were damaged when pipes and tanks froze and burst. Mr. Calazans has been spending his days soldering pipes, below left, and reaching into frigid waters to turn water main shut-off valves. A full re-piping job can cost about $10,000.; Mr. Calazans is bracing for a nonstop schedule of repairs. Even his own garage was flooded by a broken water line. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MARK FELIX FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A15)
Load-Date: February 22, 2021



End of Document


Texas Winter Storm Wreaks Havoc On Farmers
NPR Weekend Edition Sunday SHOW: Weekend Edition Sunday
February 21, 2021 Sunday

Copyright 2021 National Public Radio (R) All Rights Reserved
Length: 682 words
Anchors: Stella Chávez
Guests: Faith Ellis, John Paul Dineen, Sid Miller
Body




LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO:                 It has been an awful time for millions of Texans - record cold, power outages, boil-water notices on top of the pandemic. Ranchers and farmers who help supply the nation's food have raced to keep their animals and crops alive, as Stella Chavez reports from member station KERA.             
STELLA CHAVEZ:                 As snow fell and temperatures plunged, most Texans hunkered down indoors - not Faith and Bill Ellis, though. They bundled up and hopped on their tractor, which doubled as a snowplow.             
FAITH ELLIS:                 We are headed out to feed these cattle.             
STELLA CHAVEZ:                 That was Wednesday. The next day, they were back out on their 80-acre farm, a couple of hours northeast of Dallas. They plowed through two-foot snowdrifts to check on their 25 head of cattle, plus pens of chickens and rabbits. They also grow mustard and collard greens, cabbage and carrots. When bad weather hits, that means more work.             
FAITH ELLIS:                 It's a constant, almost around-the-clock thing. When we finally come in, right when the sun goes down, we're exhausted because we've been out two to three times during the day, trudging through, you know, two feet of snow, trying to make sure that produce and animals are taken care of.             
STELLA CHAVEZ:                 Ellis and other Texas farmers say it's too early to know the full extent of crop damage. They'll have to wait till things thaw out. All of their animals made it through the storm. Ellis worked to harden their cattle for this weather. Plenty of food, plus their coats, help them retain heat. One complication - this all hit in the middle of calving season.             
FAITH ELLIS:                 The calves are, you know, being born. And they're wet, and they've got to get them warm. So that's our biggest concern. And for those, we will bring up closer to the barn and then open the barn for the mothers and their babies to get in.             
STELLA CHAVEZ:                 Three hours southwest, outside Waxahachie, John Paul Dineen and his wife Heather farm 700 acres. They raise cattle and pigs and grow wheat, corn and milo.             
JOHN PAUL DINEEN:                 We woke up, you know, at zero degrees. We've been seven days below 32. The fuel in our equipment has gelled. We did not have additive in there to keep that from happening because that's never happened to us before.             
STELLA CHAVEZ:                 That meant he couldn't start his tractors for two days. What really threw them was the power cycling off and on.             
JOHN PAUL DINEEN:                 Those things really throw a kink in things because you have, you know, heat lamps trying to keep pipes warm, heaters trying to keep equipment warm. When you don't have consistent electricity, then you can't have that stuff to where you can start it up. And it has really been an awakening for us.             
STELLA CHAVEZ:                 Earlier in the week, state Agriculture Commissioner Sid Miller told Fox News Business he was worried about the food supply chain.             
                            (SOUNDBITE OF ARCHIVED RECORDING)                
SID MILLER:                 The shelves are bare in our grocery stores above any dairy products. We've got poultry producers that are suffering. It's unexcusable (ph) the situation we're in.             
STELLA CHAVEZ:                 John Paul Dineen says he's talked to farmers across the state. Some lost citrus crops in the Rio Grande Valley. Others had cattle challenges.             
JOHN PAUL DINEEN:                 We do have friends that have had calves lose ears because of frostbite. We have had one friend that has lost 10% of their calf crop because of the bitter cold.             
STELLA CHAVEZ:                 He wants people to keep this in mind if the next time they're at the grocery store, they see the meat counter or dairy shelves not fully stocked.             
                For NPR News, I'm Stella Chavez in Waxahachie, Texas.             
Load-Date: February 11, 2025



End of Document


Boeing 777 Engine Fails Midair, Rains Debris Over Colorado Neighborhood; Interview With Rep. Lizzie Fletcher (D-TX); Dr. Fauci Urges Americans To Follow Public Health Guidance. Aired 3-4p ET
CNN CNN NEWSROOM 3:00 PM EST
February 21, 2021 Sunday

Copyright 2021 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved 
Section: NEWS; Domestic
Length: 7247 words
Byline: Fredricka Whitfield, Omar Jimenez, Mary Schiavo, Pete Muntean, Natasha Chen, Paul Vercammen, Katelyn Polantz
Guests: Sylvester Turner, Lizzie Fletcher, Chelsea Timmons, Nina Richardson, Doug Condon
Highlight: Pilots report engine failure shortly after Denver takeoff. Nearly 50 percent of Texas residents are under boil water advisory. California Governor speaks at COVID-19 vaccination site.
Body




[15:00:00]
FREDRICKA WHITFIELD, CNN HOST: Hello again, everyone. Thank you so much for joining me. I'm Fredricka Whitfield.
We begin this hour with a pair of scary moments as two Boeing planes over separate continents have engine fires just hours apart.
In the U.S., passengers on a United Airlines flight, a Boeing 777 captured the moments an engine failed shortly after takeoff. New video in to CNN showing chunks of debris raining down over a Denver suburb, one piece actually crashing onto a man's parked truck.
And we're also getting new details about a plane over the Netherlands. Two people were injured by falling debris after an engine caught fire on a Boeing 747 cargo plane. Pieces of that plane went slamming into cars and houses.
We've got full coverage of this developing story. CNN's Omar Jimenez is at the Denver Airport; CNN aviation correspondent, Pete Muntean is in Washington. Also joining us is Mary Schiavo. She's a CNN aviation analyst and a former Inspector General for the U.S. Transportation Department.
Omar in Denver, let's begin with you. What is the latest about this investigation?
OMAR JIMENEZ, CNN NATIONAL CORRESPONDENT: Well, for starters, investigators were quite literally picking up the pieces from this right engine failure on United flight 328 just a little bit after takeoff here at the Denver International Airport Saturday afternoon.
And part of why this was so insane is pieces from this engine were literally falling from the sky into the neighborhoods below. I mean, you take a look at this video. While there were some fragments that fell, these were large pieces, chunks that were falling, damaged trucks as we saw, but also could have destroyed homes, killed people or at the very least injured them.
Thankfully, none of that happened, somehow. And while all of that was unfolding on the ground, you had people in the sky on this plane, who heard a boom as they described and looked over and saw that right engine damaged, obviously missing what had now fallen to the ground at this point. The flight was bound for Honolulu, but luckily, they weren't over the ocean when this happened. So they promptly turned around and were able to land safely.
And I know people get made fun of for clapping when a plane lands, but this was maybe one of the few times it was merited as passengers cheered as they exited the plane being guided, of course by the pilots and crew throughout all of this.
And now moving forward, this investigation lies in the hands of the National Transportation Safety Board to figure out how this could have happened.
WHITFIELD: Mary, investigators, you know, they want to find these pieces. They want to get their hands on all the pieces because these are the clues to figure out exactly what happened, that along with you know hearing the flight recording from the pilots, what will they be searching for exactly?
MARY SCHIAVO, CNN AVIATION ANALYST: Well, the N.T.S.B. issued a very important report just last year about inspecting the fan blades on jet engines just like this, and that was based on a United Airlines incident in 2018.
And the N.T.S.B. concluded that the engine manufacturer in that case, Pratt & Whitney and also in this case, had not trained its inspectors. And so there were flaws in these blades in the engine. And from the pictures I saw on the internet from passengers on the plane, it does appear that there is a fan blade at least one broken or missing.
So the N.T.S.B. is going to already be at the scene armed with this previous investigation that they just completed in 2020, and they are going to be looking for every piece because they have to know if the flaw in the engine had been there for many years. It's a 20 plus year old plane.
That's not saying the engine is that old, so they're going to want to know if this was a flaw that was embedded for years sort of a smoking time bomb, if you will, or if it was something that happened more recently, and was it missed in inspection.
So the N.T.S.B. has a lot to do with similar incidents that have happened, they will be comparing them.
WHITFIELD: Wow. And it's just extraordinary seeing these images, too.
So, Pete, these are big planes. And when we're talking about engine failure, talk to us about the readiness of these pilots, the training involved so that they can continue to fly these planes, hopefully with one engine.
PETE MUNTEAN, CNN AVIATION CORRESPONDENT: It is such a testament to these pilots training because they really train for this and drill for this all the time in simulators. You know this can be one of the most catastrophic things that a pilot is confronted with. Thankfully though, these flight crews are very professional and run through this all of the time. It's so incredible to see these images of smoke trailing from behind a 777, it really looks more like a World War II bomber rather than a passenger airliner.
So to be confronted with this, not only do they have to tamp down the startle factor of that loud boom that you heard neighbors talking about and telling Omar about, but then they have to run through the procedure, make sure they do everything right and they are drilled for this to make sure it is almost wrought that they can do this automatically.
But what's so interesting to me, I just played back some of the air traffic control audio recording and you can actually hear some of the 777's fire alarm system in the initial radio calls that the pilots are making.
It really speaks to how quickly they had to spring into action here to get this airplane on the ground right away.
[15:05:15]
WHITFIELD: Amazing piloting. Mary, is this coincidence? I mean, you've got the commonality here of Boeing. They are different models, but both within hours, different continents, have debris, pieces falling from the engine.
SCHIAVO: Well, and it's not coincidence when you add in Japan Airlines had a similar incident just in December 2020, and then the previous United Airlines incident in 2018.
So these many instances are not coincidence and thus, the N.T.S.B. will be looking for this because that's what the N.T.S.B. does. They look for patterns, they do analysis to determine what's going to go wrong next.
The N.T.S.B. doesn't exist just for what went wrong in this case or in the past. They're trying to troubleshoot to tell us what's going to go wrong next, so we can fix it before it happens and they do this with their analysis.
And so I don't think any of this is a coincidence. It's something probably related to inspections of these engines. They're the same manufacturer, I believe, the latest information is to say manufacturer, Pratt & Whitney, and they are approximately the same age.
So coincidence goes out the window and what the N.T.S.B. is going to be doing is trend analysis.
WHITFIELD: Mary Schiavo, Pete Muntean and Omar Jimenez, thanks to all of you. Appreciate it.
All right, meantime, let's talk about what Texas is still going through. Yes, it is warming up, thawing out. But the state remains in a major crisis. More than 14 million residents, about half the state's population, still without clean water. They remain under a boil water advisory after the frigid temperatures froze or broke countless water pipes, the severe weather to blame for at least 50 deaths in several states, in fact.
For the very latest, let's bring in Natasha Chen in Houston, where residents are once again lining up this time for some relief, and you've got the Mayor with us as well.
NATASHA CHEN, CNN NATIONAL CORRESPONDENT: That's right, Fred, the city has now given out more than two million bottled water to people here. Mayor, can you tell us what the current situation is? A lot of people still don't have running water and there's still a boil water notice here.
MAYOR SYLVESTER TURNER (D), HOUSTON, TEXAS: There's still a boil water notice. The goal that we were shooting for was to be able to get that lifted on Monday, it could be sooner. I will tell you, the system has normalized. The pressure is good.
And based on our internal sampling, I think things are good. But we're waiting for the State to give us the greenlight. So that could -- that literally could happen at any moment.
I've said, Monday, but hopefully before. They are still -- but even with that, there are still people, thousands of families across the Houston region with busted water pipes, which means they don't have water. They've had to turn off their water.
So even with the boil water notice, if that is lifted really soon, they're still going to need water.
CHEN: Exactly. And you've talked about the shortage of plumbers and the shortage of supplies. So people are having trouble getting those pipes fixed.
TURNER: And the reason being is because you're dealing with a statewide crisis. It's not just like in a hurricane where certain portions of the state, this is statewide.
So even if you can find a plumber, plumbers still having to find the supplies and the materials. I made a request on F.E.M.A., to provide additional licensed plumbers, supplies, materials, all of that as quickly as possible, along with water.
CHEN: And it's important, as you said to, for people to check and make sure that the person they're hiring is licensed from wherever they are.
TURNER: You would like to think that everybody is good, and people are who they represent themselves to be. But it's very important that people check a licensed plumber. You could go on the Texas registry to find them.
And if they're plumbers, for example, coming from out of the state coming in, they still need to be licensed and you still need to be able to -- should be able to look them up. But don't -- but don't just, just because someone says that he or she is a plumber, don't put out the money that you have and then end up not getting your home repaired.
CHEN: Now yesterday, we visited a home in Houston. The homeowners also have busted pipes. And one of their concerns is their perception that they told us that the more affluent neighborhood seemed to get taken care of first in disasters after hurricanes, and now during the storm with power restoration, with water service. What do you say to people who have that complaint?
TURNER: Well, you know, in many cases, based on historical precedent, that is the case. You know, I grew up in one of those communities that is under served and under resourced, I still live in that same neighborhood. So in many cases, that has been the case.
But we, in this city, we have been laser focused on making sure that we have equity in everything, equity in the repairs. So the power has been restored across the city. With respect to the water pressure, that's being restored across the city.
We're being very sensitive to communities that are already on the margins, have suffered incredible from Hurricane Harvey, from the coronavirus, and now they're dealing with the blackouts.
[15:15:12]
TURNER: So I understand their concerns, but let me assure them that we see them. We are very sensitive to their needs. We don't want those who are at risk, more vulnerable to be on the back end of anything.
So we're going to do our very best to make sure that there's equity in distribution just like on this water distribution.
Yesterday, mass distribution in the Northeast, which is a community of color, a lower socioeconomic area, and so we've been all over moving things around. But I do understand that, but we're not going to leave anyone behind.
CHEN: Thank you, Mayor. And I know you've been putting bottles of water in these cars as well. So thank you.
And, Fred, as he mentioned, the greenlight from the State could be coming soon to lift the boil water notice here in Houston. Already as of this morning, 154 boil water notices have been lifted across the state.
So slowly, but surely, some improvements. But still, more than 14 million Texans are seeing water service disruption at this time -- Fred.
WHITFIELD: Right. Still a long way to go. All right, Natasha Chen, Mayor Turner, thanks to both of you. Appreciate it.
All right, with me now to talk more about the crisis that continues to play out there in Texas is Congresswoman Lizzie Fletcher. She is a Democratic Representative from Texas. Congresswoman, it is good to see you.
REP. LIZZIE FLETCHER (D-TX): Thank you for having me. I'm so glad to hear your focus on what's happening here in Texas. Thanks for including me today.
WHITFIELD: Absolutely. And so what's happening where you are? How are you doing? How's your family? How about at your home? Water? Power? Well, I see lights on and you're with us via computer, but if you're at home, how are things?
FLETCHER: That's right. Well, thank you. My family is doing fine, all things considered. We, like so many people across our city have had some busted pipes, we were out of power for a little over 48 hours here, some of my family members longer.
And everything we just heard Mayor Turner describing I think is right across our community, but we feel fortunate that we had a little bit of notice. On Monday, my parents' power went out first. So I had time to fill up my bathtubs.
And we are still under that boil water notice here in Houston and throughout much of my district, although we do have some of the jurisdictions in my congressional district as well where that boil water notice has been lifted.
And so, there is hope. We are slowly emerging from the power crisis. But this water crisis is very real. And I, like the Mayor, Mayor Turner is my Mayor, and like him, I've been handing out bottled water, working with our City Council members, with Harris County Commissioners to make sure that people across our community get bottled water, drinking water, and also water for other uses, and there's just such a great need right now across our community and across the entire State of Texas.
WHITFIELD: So clearly, you knew what to do with, you know, putting water in your bathtubs. You were born and raised in Texas. But you know, beyond the energy stuff, which we will talk about in a minute, what do you believe happened here?
Do you feel like as a whole, Texans were caught off guard, you know, not ready for this kind of weather?
FLETCHER: Yes, it's a great question. And I think there was a cascading series of failures here. As one person I talked to recently put it, you know, this was like a hurricane out in the Gulf, and in fact, that's how I responded to it.
I have a bag ready for hurricanes that has a weather radio and lamps in it and emergency candles. I didn't need the off this time, but you know, I went and got my bag and filled up my bathtubs, but really, we didn't have the kind of notice we have for a hurricane even though ERCOT was looking a week before the events at a real power loss.
And so I think there was a huge communication failure to those of us who had our power shut off, as well as real risks to the grid. And so we have seen that this catastrophic power failure was magnified by a failure to communicate with customers by an inability to roll those blackouts so that some people have been without power for 72 hours or longer.
It's one thing to roll your power off for four or five hours at a time, and I think we could have made adjustments if there have been better communication.
But really, we have to reevaluate our entire system here and see what failed. I think there are failures at every level, but especially failure of government and paying attention to the information we have had for years about what we need to do to protect not just our grid, but to protect our neighbors and our citizens of the state of Texas.
WHITFIELD: And how will you go about reevaluating? You serve in the House Energy and Commerce Committee, Texas State leaders have not pushed utilities to winterize the grid, the power lines, the power plants you know in the past. You're calling for an investigation into ERCOT for starters, which runs, you know much of the Texas grid, but what can Congress do in this reevaluation?
[15:15:10]
FLETCHER: Well, that's right. The Energy and Commerce Committee has called for a full investigation, and my colleague Marc Veasey from Fort Worth, and I serve on that committee and are very grateful for the quick and early support of our Chairman and Subcommittee Chairman on getting an investigation rolling, calling on the F.E.R.C. to work with us as well.
Now, the F.E.R.C. evaluated a failure in Texas 10 years ago, and had several recommendations, including winterization of our equipment. And what we've seen is the way the Texas system is designed, we don't have incentives for power providers to do that winterization, there are not financial incentives.
And the other thing is in this market-based system, we don't really have excess capacity, and that's to bring costs down, but we've seen the cost over the last week in lives. We've seen the incredible devastation and disruption from this loss of power across our state.
And so, we really need to reevaluate both winterization as well as capacity issues and we need to look at oversight and regulation.
Ultimately, the Governor of Texas, the State Legislature oversee not just ERCOT, but the Public Utility Commission. We need to make sure that there are enforceable standards, and I think that what our committee can do on Energy and Commerce is talk about the best practices.
But also, we need to look and see what all of these systemic failures are. And here in Texas, I think people are willing to reevaluate how it is that we do things to make sure that our number one priority is met, which is keeping people safe.
And I always say, keeping people safe is the first responsibility of government and our government in Texas failed us this week.
WHITFIELD: One of your constituents is Senator Ted Cruz, and you've said in response to his Cancun trip this week that leadership matters. Is his apology enough?
FLETCHER: Well, I really haven't focused on Senator Cruz this week because what I'm seeing is leadership across our community.
I know that my colleagues in Congress are out doing what I'm doing. I know that our -- I mean, we just saw Mayor Turner, who has been such a champion this week. Our County Judge, Lina Hidalgo, and mayors, City Council members, County Commissioners, the leadership structure here locally, really has been superb, under very difficult, challenging times.
And I should also add that in a time where our state government has really made it difficult for local governments, you know, there are sort of a lot of responsibility and yet, an attempt to take away authority.
And so there are some real structural problems that we need to focus on here in Texas, when it comes to how our government can work together, and it's something I think we do well, we did it well in August, when we had Hurricane Laura bearing down on us. I saw Federal, State and local government working together very well.
We haven't seen that, as well, before this crisis, I hope we will continue to see it after this crisis. And I'm working with our Division of Emergency Management, which is working with F.E.M.A.
Now, there is a way to help not only during the disaster, but in this recovery, and that's what I hope and expect to see from our leaders at every level.
And I'm really proud of our leaders here in Houston and Harris County who have worked so hard to get our community back on its feet.
WHITFIELD: When we hear from some Texans who say they want to hear from senior leadership, they are talking about members of Congress and the U.S. Senate. And you know, you're with us right now. We've seen other Members of Congress who have been on the ground, helping to distribute aid.
But then there have been some that we haven't heard or seen much of including Senator John Cornyn. Have you heard much about his whereabouts? His commitment? And where he is?
FLETCHER: You know, I haven't been in touch with Senator Cornyn directly, either. I have been in touch with other Members of Congress. We have had calls with ERCOT this week.
We've had calls with the Texas Division of Emergency Management every morning, and I hear my colleagues asking questions on those calls as I am. So I know that many members of our congressional delegation are very engaged in responding with their communities. And of course, there are so many things the Federal government can do in moments like this. And one of the critical pieces is distributing aid.
And I led my colleagues on Thursday in urging President Biden to sign the major disaster declaration as quickly as possible which he now have done.
WHITFIELD: And he will be visiting Texas this week. Yes, and he is visiting Texas this week. Do you think it's particularly important for the President to see firsthand where the need is and to show his face and make --
FLETCHER: I do think so, and I think he has been very respectful in saying he wants to come at the appropriate time when it's not a burden on the recovery efforts, and so I appreciate.
I think many of us over the last week when we had no power and no sense of when it was going to be restored. And now of course, there's the water crisis. It's important to know that people are seeing that; that the President of United States understands the devastation here and is doing everything he can to help.
So I'm glad to see the response from President Biden. He has been on top of this since before the weather hit, signing that initial disaster declaration.
And I think it's really important for us here in Texas to see that and to see it from all of our elected leaders.
[15:20:21]
WHITFIELD: All right, Congresswoman Lizzie Fletcher, thank you so much for your time. Appreciate it and all the best.
FLETCHER: Thanks so much.
WHITFIELD: All right. Still to come this hour, growing fears of an upcoming COVID surge due to the U.K. variant. How Dr. Anthony Fauci says we need to prepare.
Plus stunning new details coming out of court documents surrounding the Capitol insurrection. Why an alleged leader of the Oath Keepers claims she met with the U.S. Secret Service and was only there to provide security.
And later, a delivery driver stranded in the bad weather in Texas gets an unexpected surprise from the couple who live at her last delivery, a place to hunker down for five days. The three will be joining me live.
[15:25:11]
WHITFIELD: Dr. Anthony Fauci says Americans may have to wear masks into 2022 in order to protect against the coronavirus. The nation's top infectious disease expert saying the U.S. could reach some level of normalcy by the end of the year.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
DR. ANTHONY FAUCI, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF ALLERGY AND INFECTIOUS DISEASES: I think you always want to be prepared for that type of thing. I don't think at all that it is inevitable that that will happen. The way you mitigate against that, Dana, is you do two things, you continue to abide by the public health measures and recommendations of universal wearing of masks, keeping physical distance, avoiding congregate settings, particularly indoors, washing your hands, the things that we speak about all the time. That's a very good way to prevent any infection, be it a variant or not.
The other thing that's important that our viewers should appreciate, is that the vaccines that we are currently distributing now, the Moderna and the Pfizer vaccines work very well against the U.K. variant, the 1-1-7.
So the better we do at getting vaccine into people's arms as quickly and as expeditiously as possible, that will be another important tool against preventing this additional spike that we want to make sure does not happen with the U.K. variant.
DANA BASH, CNN CHIEF POLITICAL CORRESPONDENT: You've been very open about the fact that you've been skipping Holidays with your family, you're fully vaccinated. Are you seeing your family?
FAUCI: Right now, not yet. Not yet. I mean, I would look forward to it within a reasonable period of time as the rest of my family gets vaccinated. And obviously I'm with my wife every day, she has gotten her first dose and will soon get her second dose.
But my children, when they get vaccinated, obviously I look forward to seeing them and I'm sure that by that time, recommendations will come out to guide us in a more precise way.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WHITFIELD: All right, California is a state hit hard by coronavirus and the Governor, Gavin Newsom, talking now.
GOV. GAVIN NEWSOM (D-CA): ... down to 3.1. Today, we recorded just over 6,700 cases. A month ago we had over 20,000 cases.
So in all instances, positivity rate, case rates, we're moving in the right direction. We're also moving in the right direction as it relates to hospitalizations.
Hospitalizations are down 41 percent in the last two weeks, 39 percent reduction in the ICUs in the last few weeks, all very encouraging signs.
We're building out a system, a supply system that can allow us to administer four million vaccinations a week. We're currently averaging 200,000 vaccinations. In fact as of yesterday, 201,000 vaccinations every single day, we did 1.4 million last week.
But I want to put that in perspective, we received less than that from the Federal government last week. Our only constraint now in terms of more vaccines into the community, meaning people where they are, where we are here in Inglewood and elsewhere is supply limitation, manufactured supply.
Obviously, the impacts of this extreme weather have had an impact here in the State of California as it relates to our supply, 702,000 doses were impacted specifically, primarily Moderna doses, Pfizer is a little bit delayed. Moderna's -- we're going to be behind a little bit more.
But that's 702,000. It is a point of consideration as it relates to our acceleration of the administration of vaccines over the course of the next week.
But nonetheless, we're building out a system, we're building capacity, only constraint only limitation is supply.
I want to thank the Biden administration not only for the partnership, as it relates to these two F.E.M.A. sites that both went operational on Tuesday, and the other additional satellite sites on Thursday. We were up just as an example, yesterday, in Hayward, California vaccinating our teachers as a priority utilizing these pop-up and mobile sites.
Incidentally, we also committed to 300 plus thousand doses over the course of the next month for our educators as well, starting with a minimum of 75,000 doses set aside and growing 10 percent of all the additional available doses -- first doses that is -- that come into the state will be set aside for educators.
So we are prioritizing our educators, have been doing that, 35 counties had previously already been prioritizing the administration of vaccinations to their teachers, including Long Beach, a perfect example, 34 other counties in addition to the work that was being done in that city.
But nonetheless, we recognize our responsibility to do more, not only across tiers, getting our teachers, but focusing on farmworkers. We are down at Coachella Valley and an equity coalition and collaborative focusing on farm workers and pop-up sites in partnership with ranchers and with farm managers.
[15:30:10]
NEWSOM: We also are doing the same in Central Valley, in Madeira a couple of days ago in Fresno, doing similar sites through a company called Optumserve, 20 satellite sites with Optumserve can all focus and frame on equity, speed, efficiency, focus on delivering, not a platitude, but on the promise that we're promoting to do more and better in terms of reaching out to the diverse communities in this state.
We put out a dashboard a few weeks ago that aggregated -- about a week ago, that aggregated our capacity in terms of what we have delivered to our diverse communities, and it showed we're falling short and we've got to own that.
The reason I'm here is we own that. We recognize our responsibility to do more. We're not doing enough. We need to do significantly more programs like this. The African-American community deserves nothing less --
WHITFIELD: California Governor Gavin Newsom there saying California COVID cases are down significantly. I'm quoting him now, they are moving in the right direction.
CNN's Paul Vercammen is at one of the pop-up vaccination locations where the Governor just toured. Tell us more -- Paul.
PAUL VERCAMMEN, CNN CORRESPONDENT: Well, the Governor came down here today. I am at this news conference, Fredricka. And it was his mission to observe firsthand these joint sites between F.E.M.A. and the California Office of Emergency Services.
And in this particular instance, they split off from the mass vaccination site at CalState Los Angeles and they went into this community in Inglewood, an underserved community. And the concept of the idea clearly is to get more shots in the arms of African- Americans, as well as Latinos.
So Governor Newsom came here on this tour and he is going to go elsewhere today to observe this in person. You may know there's a recall effort, the Governor has been under fire. Some people in the State of California have criticized him, others have applauded him.
And he's trying to allay some people's fears. Among other things that he has been highlighting is, he said he is setting aside 10 percent of future vaccinations for teachers.
There has been a lot of debate in California about when to reopen schools and some of the unions in the poorer neighborhood say we just don't think it's safe quite yet, while other districts say the C.D.C. and others are giving us guidelines to say let's get on in and reopen the school. So it's a fiery debate and that's why the Governor is here to try to address a whole myriad of COVID-19 concerns, issues and policies in California.
WHITFIELD: And so Paul, will there be, you know, more of this effort to bring vaccination sites particularly to underserved communities, because we have been seeing those long lines at say, like Dodger Stadium, but then the complaint is not everyone has the means in which to be in a car and in a long line.
So pop-up or mobile locations are really important for so many communities.
VERCAMMEN: That's exactly right. So there's both mass vaccination sites in some of the underserved communities and these pop-up sites. And because Los Angeles County is such a crazy quilt of different operations, somewhat under the radar this week, AEG, Dignity Health, LA Galaxy had a soccer stadium, and they vaccinated some 20,000 people way under the radar right in the middle of an underserved community.
And then we are also seeing, as you pointed out, Fred, when Dodger Stadium gets back up and running, it can help address this issue. And we're seeing a lot more of these flexible, mobile or pop-up sites.
So these tents will be here for a couple of days, these vaccination tests, and then they will move elsewhere, again, targeting these communities, and this is just seeming to catch some momentum, if they can just catch their breath because of the inability to distribute vaccines throughout LA County, it looks like they could have a very good week this week in Los Angeles with multiple partners and agencies, giving doses.
WHITFIELD: All right, Paul, and again, no matter the vaccination sites, we did hear from the Governor who did say and warned that supply is still an obstacle, a problem.
All right, thank you so much, Paul Vercammen for bringing all this to us from California.
All right, straight ahead, a leader in an alleged Oath Keepers conspiracy in the Capitol insurrection claims that she met with Secret Service agents and was given a VIP pass to the January 6 rally. Moments ago, the Secret Service gave a response to CNN. That is next.
[13:39:07]
WHITFIELD: Damning new details are being revealed about some of the people who stormed the Capitol last month. A lawyer for Jessica Watkins, one of the leaders of the Ohio Oath Keepers militia group now says that she was invited to the Trump rally back on January 6 to provide security for VIP guests.
She also now claims that she met with the U.S. Secret Service before the event. CNN's Katelyn Polantz is tracking this story for us. So Katelyn, what are you learning?
KATELYN POLANTZ, CNN CRIME AND JUSTICE REPORTER: Right, so this is new from a filing that we got from the defense team last night for Jessica Watkins in a major case, she is a major defendant in the Oath Keepers case, that's a paramilitary extremist group that the Justice Department is saying took part in the Capitol riot.
But what Watkins is saying is that she was not violent in the Capitol riot and instead that she was given VIP pass to the Trump event, that she was expected to be escorting legislators and others as they walked to the Capitol, and that she met with Secret Service agents.
[15:40:11]
POLANTZ: Now, we don't know the full context of that at this point and what she means by that. There isn't much more detail available to us, but the Secret Service has denied this in a statement. This is what they said today: "To carry out its protective functions on January 6, the U.S. Secret Service relied on the assistance of various government partners. Any assertion that the Secret Service employed private citizens to perform those functions is false."
Now remember, this comes in a case against nine alleged members of this Oath Keepers militia group, and really, there are more questions that are being raised about what this group was doing, what they believe they were doing.
Some of them, including Watkins are saying they believe they were responding to the call of President Trump, that they were ex-military and that they believe they are some sort of offering law enforcement assistance to Trump in the situation where there was the Electoral College in Congress asserting or confirming.
But really, there are a lot of questions that remain. We will see Watkins in court on Tuesday, where the Justice Department will have a chance to respond to these claims -- Fred.
WHITFIELD: Seemingly every day new dribbles of information or reports. Katelyn Polantz, thanks so much.
All right, coming up, a Texas delivery driver calls for a tow truck after she gets stuck on an icy driveway. But then the tow truck never shows up. What happens next is nothing short of a miracle. The driver and her unexpected heroes joining me live, next.
[15:45:52]
WHITFIELD: All right, we have breaking news. The City of Houston just announced that it will lift the boil water notice effective immediately. Residents there have been without water since Wednesday.
President Biden is expected to travel to Texas in the coming days following that devastating week of below freezing temperatures and winter storms.
The conditions causing widespread power outages across the state that impacted millions of homes and businesses. Well, it's impacted 14 million people who are still without clean water.
Amid the tales of people struggling to survive, this heartwarming story shows that Texas hospitality is a real deal.
Two strangers took in a delivery driver for five days after she got stranded outside their home while delivering groceries.
And joining me right now is this amazing trio, the delivery driver Chelsea Timmons and the two homeowners Nina Richardson and Doug Condon. Good to see all of you.
CHELSEA TIMMONS, DELIVERY DRIVER: Hi.
NINA RICHARDSON, TEXAS HOMEOWNER WHO TOOK IN DELIVERY DRIVER: You, too. WHITFIELD: Oh, fantastic. This is a lovely warm it up story and boy, do we need that. So Chelsea, you first. How did all this happen? What was going on?
TIMMONS: So as you said, it was just routine grocery delivery. There was definitely a high demand for groceries that day as everyone prepared for the winter storm.
Nina and Doug's delivery was actually scheduled for Saturday before the storm actually hit, but the stores were so overwhelmed that they couldn't get everything out.
So Sunday, there was a lot of backlog of groceries to go out and their order was one of them and it was the one that I happen to accept that day.
WHITFIELD: Oh my gosh. And so here you are about to make this delivery. You're on this road. Now, what happened that you got stuck, you know, describe what happened and that I understand you did call for, you know, tow help but that didn't happen. So fill in the blanks for me.
TIMMONS: So I got a text from them. I told them I was on the way, I got a text from Nina saying "Be careful, the stairs are slippery." So I just had that in my mind the whole time as I was headed to their home.
Their home actually sits lower than the main road and their driveway is a pretty steep slope going downhill and I went down the hill very slowly trying to be very cautious. But every time I tapped the brake, nothing was happening, and I just closed my eyes as my car just slid down the hill into their flowerbed.
After that, I called them I told them what happened. We called a tow truck and waited for hours. And they never -- they never showed up.
And finally that evening, they called and said that the conditions have worsened that nobody could get to.
And I actually never received a call back from the tow company until Wednesday, I believe, is when they finally called me.
WHITFIELD: Oh my gosh. So Nina, you know, here, you know Chelsea is making these, you know, delivery of these groceries to you. She's gone through all this. You know, now she can't get out of there. Your instinct, I understand was near immediate to just say why don't you stay here?
RICHARDSON: Oh, for sure. There's no way we would have sent her out into the cold. And so, you know, we just said come on in and make yourself at home upstairs in the guest room. And, you know, she sat at the table for a little bit and seemed really uncomfortable.
And so we you know, kind of over time, things warmed up quite a bit and she ended up really kind of just fitting into the rest of the family and we treated her like everybody else. WHITFIELD: Oh my gosh, I'm looking at these great pictures. I mean, Chelsea you got to know the dogs. I mean, you know and you all are like, you know immediate family. So Doug, you know, tell me what this whole experience was like. I mean, what you all were bracing for and then come to find out, you get this gift of a new friendship all by way of you all trying to get some groceries in the house.
DOUG CONDON, TEXAS HOMEOWNER WHO TOOK IN DELIVERY DRIVER: Yes, I mean, I'm sure like everyone else in Texas, we had no idea how bad it was going to be, but you know, we were watching the conditions on Sunday and it was just getting worse and worse and we just knew that it was unlikely that Chelsea was going to go anywhere Sunday night.
And then you know one day just kind of led to the next and you know, we just kept playing it by ear. And, you know, if she wasn't going to get any assistance from a towing company, we certainly were not going to put her back on the roads until we felt entirely comfortable that the conditions were safe for her to head back home.
[15:50:26]
WHITFIELD: Oh, my gosh, Chelsea, you must have been shocked, though initially when they just said, you know, stay here. Was it shock you were feeling? Was there ever any reluctance? Or did you feel like well, you know, I don't know what my choices are otherwise, anyway.
TIMMONS: There was always just a sense for me to try to make sure I was showing them I wasn't trying to bum, trying to invade their space for too long. Though I definitely, every day, every morning before I left my room, I had to come up with the strategy, let them know what I was doing.
And every day when I presented it to them, they're like, okay, whatever. I definitely tried to make a break for it a few times. I just kept saying the roads are a little more clear today. I think I can at least head out to a hotel.
And I think once they found out that home-home for me was all the way in Houston. That's when they were just like, you know, a hotel just --
WHITFIELD: How far is that from where you ended up?
TIMMONS: They are way in West Austin, so it was about a three-hour drive.
WHITFIELD: Oh my gosh.
TIMMONS: So, and typically I come to Austin and just stay the weekend and I had already had plans to head back home that afternoon before this happened, and every time I suggested just trying to make it to the hotel down the street, they were just like, well, what would you eat? Well, what if the hotel loses power? Just wait until it's clear for you to make it all the way back home.
WHITFIELD: Yes. Oh my gosh, that was harrowing all the way. So Nina, something tells me you all are all now fast friends, forever friends. RICHARDSON: You know, it's funny, because we've got two grown daughters, Sarah and Campbell, who a lot of times tease each other about who is the favorite child and like day four, we get a text from Campbell and she's like, oh, great, Chelsea is now the favorite child.
WHITFIELD: That's wonderful. Well, thank you so much. Thanks for coming to each other's aid because you all helped each other out in the end, right, didn't you?
Chelsea Timmons, Nina Richardson, Doug Condon. Thanks to all of you. Appreciate it. I love hearing this story. It's really nice.
TIMMONS: Thanks.
CONDON: Thank you.
WHITFIELD: We'll be right back.
[15:57:00]
WHITFIELD: Stanley Tucci travels to the Great City of Rome in search of some perfect pasta on tonight's brand new episode of our new CNN original series. Here's a preview.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
STANLEY TUCCI, CNN HOST: (Speaking foreign language.)
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: (Speaking foreign language).
Are you ready?
TUCCI: (Speaking foreign language).
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: (Speaking foreign language).
TUCCI: I know. I know. You have basically four ingredients. Pasta, eggs, the one chalet and cheese. That's it.
TUCCI (voice over): But when I try it at home, it's never this good.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: (Speaking in foreign language).
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: (Speaking in foreign language).
TUCCI: My mother does that, too.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: (Speaking in foreign language).
TUCCI: I can just die now.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WHITFIELD: Oh, that just makes me even hungrier. Don't miss "Stanley Tucci: Searching for Italy." Tonight at nine Eastern and Pacific only here on CNN.
All right, despite much sadness and devastation from COVID-19 to the deadly winter storm, this is a special day.
The most extraordinary influence and creator of my life, my mother Nola Jane Simon Whitfield turns 88 today, double infinity is how I'd like to see it.
She's more than my mom, of course, she's mom to my brother and sister, too. Grandma to eight, great grandma to five. And before that and throughout, she has exemplified grace, strength, elegance, determination and dignity.
As one of seven kids to Fred and Evelyn Simon, she graduated from Texas HBCU Prairie View A&M University, a groundbreaker. She was the first black Miss 7-Up model gracing magazines. And after marriage, she and dad lived across the globe.
And during one of her pregnancies with one of my siblings, she has described to me the humiliation of being told she couldn't go into a white-only bathroom at the airport in one of America's southern states. She was pregnant and she had to go. Well, she defied the harassment went to that bathroom anyway.
Well, today still with chutzpah, she is a retired Program Analyst of the National Institutes of Health, still beautiful like roses and sharp like the thorns, she will get her second COVID vaccine soon and when it's my turn, I will, too get vaccinated.
After so many months, I look forward to that belated birthday hug for our magnificent mom. Happy birthday, mom.
We love you.
Thanks so much for being with us today. I'm Fredricka Whitfield. CNN NEWSROOM with Erica Hill starts right now.
[10:00:00]
Load-Date: February 21, 2021



End of Document


Happ beats Cubs in arbitration
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 21, 2021 Sunday
FINAL EDITION

Copyright 2021 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS; Pg. D8
Length: 750 words
Byline:  By WIRE REPORTS 
Body




> Archiving note: This article has not been checked against the print edition and shall not be used as an official copy of the newspaper. To verify accuracy, please compare to our digital microfilm at www.stltoday.newspapers.com.
Outfielder Ian Happ defeated the Chicago Cubs in baseball's final salary arbitration case this year on Friday and will get a raise from $624,000 to $4.1 million.
Teams finished with a 5-4 advantage in cases that went to a hearing, their second straight winning record after two consecutive years in which players had an advantage. Overall, teams are 325-247 since arbitration began in 1974.
A day after hearing arguments, arbitrators Frederic Horowitz, Steven Wolf and Jules Bloch decided in favor of Happ's figure rather than the team's $3.25 million.
Happ, 26, hit .258 with 12 homers and 28 RBIs over 198 at-bats during the shortened season. He was eligible for arbitration for the first time after earning $231,111 in prorated pay.
Scherzer limited
Washington Nationals star Max Scherzer sprained his left ankle while running and is not working off a mound yet. Scherzer says his arm is fine.
"Fortunately, through all this, I've been able to keep my strength up. And my arm is ready to go. So as soon as I can get that mobility back in the ankle, I'll be off the mound here pretty soon," Scherzer said. "I don't see this as a long-term injury."
Storms on Rangers' minds
While Texas Rangers pitchers and catchers worked out Friday in Surprise, Arizona - where it was sunny with temperatures in the upper 60s - some had family who were home dealing with the impact of winter storms in the South that left millions of people without power and under boil-water notices.
"There are guys who are trying to be in two places at once," right-hander Kyle Gibson said. "I talked to a guy, he just left five days ago before it froze where he was from. And now his wife and a couple of kids are back there trying to keep the house from freezing. So there's some guys that are in two places right now."
Gibson didn't specify where that person was from, but the Dallas-Fort Worth area where the Rangers play home games was starting to thaw out Friday.
"We just want to send our thoughts and prayers out to people in the DFW area, and all over the South right now. They're going through this deep freeze. It's been crazy, and life changing for a lot of people," Gibson said.
Turner glad to be back with Dodgers
Justin Turner's extended flirtation with free agency ended where it began - with the Los Angeles Dodgers. A deal was reached last Saturday, and the contract was made official Friday. It's worth $34 million over two years, according to people with knowledge of the situation.
Along the way, the third baseman had doubts about whether he would return to his hometown team and wondered if his mask-less appearance on the field to celebrate the Dodgers' World Series championship would hurt him.
How close did he come to signing elsewhere?
"There were some times where I was like, ‘Oh man, like, this doesn't look good, like I'm not sure what's going to happen,'" he said. "But at the end of the day it all worked out how it's supposed to," he said, "and I'm back in Dodger blue like I was supposed to be."
Gardner returns to Yankees
Brett Gardner is returning to the New York Yankees for a 14th season.
The 37-year outfielder and New York agreed Friday to a $4 million, one-year contract, a person familiar with the negotiations told The Associated Press.
Gardner is the last player remaining from the Yankees' last World Series title in 2009.
He had a one-year contract for 2020 with a $2 million signing bonus and a $10 million salary that became $2,962,963 in prorated pay, A fan favorite, he became a free agent after the Yankees declined a $10 million option, triggering a $2.5 million buyout.
Around the league
Infielder Todd Frazier agreed to a minor league deal with the Pittsburgh Pirates that includes an invitation to big league spring training. ... The Seattle Mariners finalized a $7 million, two-year contract with reliever Ken Giles that includes a club option for the 2023 season. ... Former All-Star Johnny Damon was arrested Friday in central Florida on a charge of resisting an officer after he was pulled over for suspicion of driving under the influence, according to court and jail records. ... Veteran right-hander Tyson Ross signed a minor league contract with the Texas Rangers. ... The Detroit Tigers have agreed to a minor league contract with right-hander Wily Peralta.
Graphic



 
 Ian Happ asked for a raise from $624,000 to $4.1 million, and the Cubs argued he should be paid $3.25 million. 
Load-Date: May 22, 2021



End of Document


A Massive Winter Storm Hit The State Of Texas, Leaving Millions Of People Without Heat In Sub-Freezing Temperatures
NBC News TODAY SHOW 8:00 AM EST
February 21, 2021 Sunday

Copyright 2021  ASC Services II Media, LLC
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2021 National Broadcasting Co. Inc.
Section: NEWS; Domestic
Length: 786 words
Byline: WILLIE GEIST, MORGAN CHESKY
Highlight: This morning a growing disaster in Texas. Their hardship now official in Washington. President Biden declaring seventy-seven counties disaster areas. The added resources come as the weather crisis turns humanitarian. More than fourteen million Texans without clean drinking water. The record freeze busting pipes, and compromising water supplies. The situation leading to lines like this. Hundreds waiting for hours for a chance at free water and food.
Body




MAN (08:00:02): My apartment is under forty degrees.
PRESIDENT JOE BIDEN (08:00:04): Now is the time we should be spending. Now is the time to go big.
WOMAN #1 (08:00:08): I was nervous. I`m very glad he got it.
WOMAN #2 (08:00:14): Perseverance safely on the surface of mars.
WILLIE GEIST (08:00:23): Good morning, and welcome to Sunday TODAY on this February 21st, I am Willie Geist. It`s been nearly a week now since a massive winter storm hit the state of Texas, leaving millions of people without heat in sub-freezing temperatures. The power is back on for most of them, but the crisis this morning remains with water. Residents across the state still instructed to boil their own water to make it safe to use and drink. Many also have been waiting for hours in long food lines. We will have the latest in a live report just ahead.
(08:00:54): Then, our Sunday Focus on what exactly what happened to the power in Texas this week. And what it means for the future of energy in America.
(08:01:03): Plus, in our Sunday Spotlight, the quilts stitched for generations by the women of one tiny Alabama town finally earning their due in a place in some of America`s great museums.
(08:01:16): And later, a new Sunday Sitdown with an American icon, Willie Nelson on eight decades of music, including his new album, covering the songs of another music legend, and the first paying gig of Willie`s long career.
WILLIE NELSON (08:01:33): Honestly, the first time I thought I had made it, I had been picking cotton, and bailing hay, and working in corn showers up there in Abbot, got a job playing guitar. I was twelve years old. And I made eight dollars. I said what the hey, man. Didn`t make this much picking cotton all week.
WILLIE GEIST (08:01:56): A Sunday Sitdown with the great Willie Nelson, plus, another Life Well Lived all a bit later in the show.
(08:02:02): But let`s begin this morning in Texas where for the first time in a week, residents are waking up to warmer temperatures, but improving weather is not helping the millions of people in the state facing a massive water crisis this morning. NBC`s Morgan Chesky is in Dallas for us. Morgan, good morning.
MORGAN CHESKY (08:02:21): Hey, Willie, good morning to you, and there is good news and bad news, those outages are dropping by the day, but those boil water-- boil water notices are now skyrocketing. And more federal help is headed this way to a state brought to its knees by mother nature.
(Begin VT)
MORGAN CHESKY (08:02:37): This morning a growing disaster in Texas.
MAN #1 (08:02:40): Our pipes froze, and even now we don`t have any water.
MAN #2 (08:02:44): And when we turn the water on, it ended up being like Niagara Falls underneath the house.
MORGAN CHESKY (08:02:50): Their hardship now official in Washington. President Biden declaring seventy-seven counties disaster areas. The added resources come as the weather crisis turns humanitarian. More than fourteen million Texans without clean drinking water. The record freeze busting pipes, and compromising water supplies. The situation leading to lines like this. Hundreds waiting for hours for a chance at free water and food.
MAN #2 (08:03:17): When the electricity went, the heat went, and now we don`t have any water flow. That was it. That (unintelligible).
MORGAN CHESKY (08:03:22): Now, ERCOT, the agency managing the state`s power grid, is being sued for gross negligence in the death of ten-year-old Cristian Pineda, who died from suspected hypothermia. One of nearly a dozen fatal cases near Houston. In Austin, where nearly half the city lost power for multiple days, backlash is rising too.
MAYOR STEVE ADLER (08:03:42): It is the catastrophic failure.
MORGAN CHESKY (08:03:44): The winter storm on its way surpass Hurricane Harvey as the most expensive weather event in state history, which is what brought Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez to Houston. The New York lawmaker fundraising more than four million dollars for relief efforts.
REPRESENTATIVE ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ (08:03:59): Our whole country needs to come and rally together behind the needs of Texans all across the state.
MORGAN CHESKY (08:04:06): And no matter where the help is coming from, these Texans can use plenty of it.
(End VT)
MORGAN CHESKY (08:04:13): Texas Governor Greg Abbott called an emergency meeting yesterday to discuss skyrocketing consumer energy bills, in some cases following the storm, bills that are less than a hundred dollars are now approaching ten thousand. The governor stressing, he and his team are working quickly to try to alleviate that issue. Willie.
WILLIE GEIST (08:04:31): Amazing to see people boiling snow just to get some clean water. Morgan Chesky in Dallas. Morgan, thanks so much.
Load-Date: March 22, 2021



End of Document


'One thing after another': Rural Texans faced the same storm   with unique hardships
Newstex Blogs 
The Texas Tribune
February 21, 2021 Sunday 11:12 AM EST

Copyright 2021 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 1870 words
Byline: Melissa B. Taboada and Sarah M. Vasquez
Body




Feb 21, 2021( The Texas Tribune: http://texastribune.org Delivered by Newstex)  As humanitarian aid workers in Armenia and South Sudan, Jerry and Meaghan Kenney have huddled around wood stoves to keep warm and bathed with buckets for lack of water. But the couple didn't expect they'd need such survival skills to get through the winter storm at their home outside Hudson, in deep East Texas. The Kenneys, who have a 1-year-old and 3-year-old, had only intermittent power and water last week, and remain under a boil water notice. The family huddled together under the covers, built indoor tents with sheets and blankets and lobbed snowballs at one another. 
But after so many days, they grew weary of sitting in the cold and the kids lost interest in playing in the snow. 'It's hard to think about not being able to keep my kids warm, on a visceral level,' said Jerry Kenney. 'From our time living in places where water was scarce, we knew instinctively to fill up bathtubs and pots and containers, and to let the water drip overnight. I'll admit that me and the kids have not bathed every night, and fortunately, the water came back before my wife forced us all to bucket bathe.'  Like other parts of Texas, rural communities were hammered by the winter storm that left families without the basic necessities of heat and running water. But temperatures in the country dipped lower than in cities, plummeting to the low single-digits. Fewer resources serve that larger geography, and without city services, mobility can be more limited. Many living in the rural areas are ranchers and farmers, who also had to worry about and prioritize livestock and crops. Mickey Edwards has about 3,000 acres of lease pastures scattered across Lampasas County, and spent the week using axes to chop holes in the sheets of ice that covered stock tanks and water troughs for his cattle, which number about 200. To ensure the cows survived, he brought 1,400-pound hay bales and feed to them early every morning last week, not returning home until just before dark. On Tuesday, during the 100-mile round trip to tend to his cattle, Edwards' truck stalled on an incline slick with ice. No one had salted or sanded the country roads. Another truck barreled down the road in his direction, lacking traction and unable to stop, prompting Edwards to jump from his vehicle, past the ditch on the side of the road, to a fence. It was a close call with no impact or injuries. But the trip was necessary.  'We know other ranchers aren't as in good shape as we are,' said Edwards, whose family has been in the ranching business for eight generations   since before the Civil War. 'We didn't have that second sheet of ice. Some of our friends near Florence couldn't even drive because they had an inch of ice on top of the snow, so they were homebound and couldn't get off their home place to go check cattle. They probably didn't fare as well as we did. We feel very fortunate.' The cold was too much for the newborn calves and many lost cattle. 'Livestock-wise on the dairy end, it's just a struggle. You try to keep them fed, keep them milked, keep them watered,' said Russell Boening, a dairy farmer in Poth, southeast of San Antonio. 'A lot of our beef cows are having babies right now. You have to get to them pretty quick after they're born Everyone is doing what they can to save those babies. We lost a couple. We couldn't get there in time.' Boening, president of the Texas Farm Bureau, said he's been at this work for nearly 40 years. He has never seen a weather event like this in South Texas, and is hearing similar stories across the state from the organization's 500,000 members.  Vegetable and citrus farmers suffered substantial losses, he said. And while at least half of the citrus crops of oranges and grapefruit had already been harvested in the Rio Grande Valley, he said the losses for that region alone total more than $300 million so far. 'It's difficult to prepare for what you've never lived in,' Boening said. 'There hasn't been anyone who was spared the craziness,' said Randy Willis, superintendent of the 450-student Granger Independent School District, in northeastern Williamson County. 'It's been a challenge for every superintendent, whether you're big, small, rural or urban. It's one of those once-in-a-lifetime things that just crippled us. We had people without water or power for over seven days.' A water pipe burst within the 1924 building that houses the district's middle and high school students, rendering a classroom unusable. But with some teachers and students still lacking power and the internet, the district might not reopen Monday, not even virtually. (After the winter break, about 90% of students had returned in person for school.) Willis, who was on the verge of losing water again Friday night, said he wants to return students to normalcy as soon as possible, but will assess the situation Sunday night. He said he must weigh 'the human cost' on students and staff members, and the stress they've endured in the past week.  In Marfa, the south side of Lincoln Street was without power Monday through Wednesday. The northern neighborhoods remained online. Marfa ISD's campus straddles Lincoln Street, so the main campus didn't lose power, but the bus barn across the street did. Local officials partnered with MISD Superintendent Oscar Aguero last Monday afternoon to turn the cafeteria into a warming center, with cots available in the gymnasium. Those who lost power had a place to warm up, charge their electronics and get a meal. Local grocery stores   Porter's Thriftway and The Get Go   and some individuals donated extra food and water. With the help of MISD cafeteria staff and volunteers, they were able to provide 60 to 75 meals for breakfast and for lunch.   First: Marfa Food Pantry volunteers Gary Oliver and Alisha Waller load pallets with boxes of food for Saturday morning distribution. West Texas Food Bank delivered food Friday night after power was restored in Marfa. Last: Marfa resident Ellie Tejada gathers produce from the Marfa Food Pantry Saturday morning. Tejada didn't have power at her house for three days this week and had to throw out her food. Credit: Sarah M. Vasquez for The Texas Tribune     Audrey Herrera grabbed a meal on Tuesday as the food in her fridge had gone bad. Growing up in southern California, she's never experienced a 'real winter' until she moved to Marfa in 2019, and she didn't properly prepare for the outages. She was able to stay warm with the gas heater in her casita. Her co-workers donated food and supplies, and her neighbors provided hot water. 'It kind of felt like we were in it together, even though I live alone,' said Herrera.  The West Texas Food Bank in Odessa delivered 150 boxes of food to the Marfa Food Pantry Friday night, and planned to bring an additional five pallets. Elbert Bassham, the program manager, texted the residents he normally sees at the pantry's bi-weekly distributions to let them know about the food and vegetables ready for pick-up, and word spread on social media. Since the COVID-19 pandemic, the pantry has served an average of 100 families with an average of two to three individuals per family. Bassham stopped by the pantry every day to power the refrigerators and freezers with a generator. The generator is powered by gasoline, so it was limited because the power was off at the three stations in town. Bassham was able to borrow some until he drove to Alpine, where KC's Mart still had gas. 'I filled up every container I had, plus my car and everything, in anticipation of more issues,' said Bassham. 'As it turns out, we don't need it. I have extra gas now.' In Milam County, part of the San Gabriel River froze. Water lines and pumping stations froze in Rockdale and Cameron, home to about 5,000 residents each. On Friday, about 10% of this agricultural community, about 75,000 acres of which is crop land and 225,000 of which is ranch land that runs cattle, remained without electricity and 15% without water. The county remains on a boil water notice for those who have it.  'It's been pretty miserable,' said Milam County Judge Steve Young. 'It's been one thing after another. It's just been a mess.' With the power out, the sewage treatment plant in Rockdale couldn't operate properly. 'They were just about at the point of pumping raw sewage into the creek,' said Young, who was among Milam County residents still without power on Friday. The electric company was able to get things back online at the plant Friday, avoiding disaster.  Young, also a cattle rancher, lost two newborn calves but was able to save three others, including one Friday morning, when he got up at 3:30 a.m. to ensure its survival upon delivery. 'You sponsor that old cow all year for that calf, and that kind of thing happens, and it really sets you back,' Young said. 'It's no big deal in some ways, but doggone, I hate that. It's more than just economics, it's a terrible loss.' Goodall-Witcher Hospital, located in 4,500-resident Clifton, located northwest of Waco, is Bosque County's only hospital. It was never without power for long, but the water main burst, spilling into the generator room and forcing the medical center to shut off the water to the fire sprinkler system. It could be several more days before it's repaired. Multiple patients without power at home were admitted with breathing problems after their oxygen machines were turned off. Between six and a dozen staff members spent the night at the hospital after conditions made it too dangerous to travel back and forth. CEO Adam Willman, who has a four-wheel drive truck, also picked up employees from their homes. One of the clinics in the health system couldn't open because of power and water outages.  'We took everything day by day,' Willman said. 'We're exhausted, but in the end, we did what we had to do to take care of everything we needed to do.' Rural Texans also told stories of joy amid the hardship. Neighbors helped neighbors, letting them stay at their homes or shoveling ice and snow from their sidewalks. Volunteers worked overnight to cook for warming centers and keep them staffed. While the icy roads kept Young from reaching his 93-year-old father whose pipes froze at his Rockdale house, leaving him without water, local police officers delivered a case of water bottles Friday morning. A Goodall-Witcher emergency room nurse, who volunteers at a local animal shelter, checked on a patient's dogs. 'I love living in rural communities and East Texas,' said Jerry Kenney, whose neighbors came to shower at his house when his family had power and water. The neighbors, in turn, offered to pick up supplies. 'There's a sense of belonging and a resilience that is unique. I have no doubt that I can rely on my neighbor in a time of trouble.' The Texas Farm Bureau has been a financial supporter of The Texas Tribune, a nonprofit, nonpartisan news organization that is funded in part by donations from members, foundations and corporate sponsors. Financial supporters play no role in the Tribune's journalism. Find a complete list of them here[1]. [ 1]: https://www.texastribune.org/support-us/corporate-sponsors/ 
Load-Date: February 21, 2021



End of Document


Two Boeing Jets Shed Parts After Engine Fires Within 24 Hours; 777 Engine Explodes Midair, Rains Debris Over Colorado; Fourteen-Plus Million Texans Still Without Clean Water; Sixty-Three-Plus Million COVID-19 Vaccine Doses Administered In The U.S.; House Poised To Pass Biden's $1.9 Trillion COVID Relief Package. Aired 2-3p ET
CNN CNN NEWSROOM 2:00 PM EST
February 21, 2021 Sunday

Copyright 2021 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved 
Section: NEWS; Domestic
Length: 6221 words
Byline: Fredricka Whitfield, Richard Quest, Lucy Kafanov, Natasha Chen, Suzanne Malveaux, Arlette Saenz
Guests: Ron Nirenberg, Celine Gounder, Breanna Ivey
Highlight: In the U.S., a video shows chunks of debris from a Boeing 777, raining down over a Denver suburb, one piece crashing onto a man's parked truck. More than 14 million people are still facing water problems in Texas after a deadly winter storm. About 63 million coronavirus vaccine doses have now been administered across the United States, this as new research shows evidence that a single dose of Pfizer's coronavirus vaccine might be enough to significantly reduce disease.
Body




[14:00:23]
FREDRICKA WHITFIELD, CNN HOST: Hello, everyone. Thank you so much for joining me this Sunday.
I'm Fredricka Whitfield.
We're following several developing stories this hour.
First a pair of terrifying moments as two Boeing planes over separate continents have engine fires just hours apart.
In the U.S., passengers on a United Airlines flight, a Boeing 777, captured the moments an engine failed shortly after takeoff. Brand new video in to CNN showing chunks of debris raining down over a Denver suburb, one piece crashing onto a man's parked truck.
And we're also getting breaking details about a second plane over the Netherlands. Two people were injured by falling debris after an engine caught fire on a Boeing 747 cargo plane. Pieces of that plane went slamming into cars and houses.
Meanwhile, back stateside in Texas nearly half of the state, more than 14 million people, are still without clean water after that brutal massive winter storm knocked out power and burst pipes across the state.
And as the U.S. nears a devastating marker in the coronavirus battle, nearly 500,000 deaths -- Dr. Fauci warning today Americans are not out of the woods.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
DR. ANTHONY FAUCI, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL INSTITUE FOR ALLERGY AND INFECTIOUS DISEASES: It's something that is historic. It's nothing like we've ever been through in the last 102 years since the 1918 influenza pandemic. It really is a terrible situation that we've been through and that we're still going through.
That's the reason why we keep insisting to continue with the public health measures, because we don't want this to get much worse than it already is.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WHITFIELD: All right. We'll get back to coronavirus.
I want to begin now with these two serious incidents involving Boeing planes.
CNN's Richard Quest joining right now. So Richard, what's your best estimation as to what investigators will focus on?
RICHARD QUEST, CNN EDITOR-AT-LARGE: Well, I think the important thing to recognize is that these events happen very rarely and it is an unfortunate coincidence that two have happened on consecutive days.
The one in the Netherlands, the plane, 747 long-tail cargo plane, was taking off from Maastricht on its way to New York when it started to shed parts of the aircraft engine, the number 1 engine, which then fell on a local town.
An elderly lady was injured, thankfully not too seriously, we believe. The plane did an emergency landing.
Now the temptation is to focus and say, two Boeing planes that engine bits have fallen off. I think that would be a very serious mistake for the simple reason that these incidents -- I'm pretty 99 percent certain -- will be unrelated.
And there are numerous cases every year where bits fall off planes. Not numerous, there are cases every year where bits fall off planes.
And what you look at, Fred, in those cases is two sides of the story. The plane, what happened, how serious; and those on the ground, what happened, how serious.
Now, if there is a failure on the plane, as there has been in both of these cases, an uncontained engine explosion or some form of incident, then inevitably, by definition, it's going to have serious ramifications for those on the ground.
And so that's what we're looking at now. Two incidents, and Fredricka, the fact that they are Boeing planes is an irrelevance.
WHITFIELD: Really.
QUEST: They could have been other airplanes, they could have been other aircraft. The Boeing aspect is not relevant, I promise you, to what has happened here.
WHITFIELD: Well, I know you say, you know, that these are unfortunate incidents and it may not be very usual for bits to come off, but when you look at, at least one of those pieces, particularly in Colorado, where, you know, it weighs about a ton, according to at least analyst. I mean that's pretty significant and those are vital pieces to keep the plane in the air. I mean the pilot said so, that he had to turn around. So talk to us about how that pilot was able to make that kind of call, maneuver and then land that aircraft safely.
QUEST: Right. So the first thing is you're absolutely right. The United case is truly horrific because the nacelle, the cowling, fell off the front of --, as you can see. Basically, the whole nacelle came off the aircraft of that engine.
[14:04:56]
QUEST: And that nacelle, those bits that you're looking at, they are designed to contain whatever happens within the engine. There's always been an understanding -- at the end of the day, the engine is a combustion engine, a jet propulsion combustion engine which could combust.
And so the idea is that the cowling and the nacelle is supposed to contain it. Now, what happened with the United plane is an exceptionally serious failure of that procedure.
As a result, you focus on what happened to the people on the ground and thank God nobody was injured.
But to your point, for the pilot, his first job in this case was determine how flyable is the plane? Have I got an airworthy aircraft?
And is you listen to the tape of what he said to air traffic control as he's vectoring to come in for his emergency landing, he says, we have some checks to do.
In other words, they need to know, is that engine going to pull a wing off? Is it likely to blow up, even though we've switched it off?
Number two, what hydraulics do we have that will be able to slow the plane? Can we deploy (INAUDIBLE). All these sorts of things he will need to know and establish.
In the case of the 747-400 out of Maastricht, exactly the same issue. In the case of the 747 a lot -- I mean if the piece hit you on the head -- this is going to sound silly. It's a lot less serious, the Maastricht case because not the big pieces fell unless you happen to be the person underneath it.
My point is the danger that we face with falling bits from aircraft -- and there've been bits of lavatories, cargo doors, urine, blocks of ice, over the years, all of these things have come off planes. The danger is well known and understood.
What we must not do is -- you know, it's like at the beach in the summer. A shark bites somebody and the next day there is another incident, and before long, everybody is saying shark alert, shark alert, shark alert.
WHITFIELD: Well, it's certainly -- yes.
(CROSSTALK) WHITFIELD: It's certainly alarming. I don't know how many people were that familiar with the fact that, you know, bits come off a plane on a fairly regular basis.
But like you said, thankfully no one was injured in the U.S., but we have heard at least two people were hurt in the Netherlands from falling debris. We're still awaiting details on the extent of those injuries.
Richard Quest, always good to see you. Thank you. We'll check back with you.
All right. So now to that terrifying flight over Colorado. The National Transportation Safety Board is investigating the debris that scattered all over a Denver suburb.
CNN's Lucy Kafanov has more.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
LUCY KAFANOV, CNN CORRESPONDENT (voice over): Terrifying video from onboard United Flight 328 showing the right engine on fire.
NATE SWISHER, PASSENGER: All of a sudden, there was a loud sound and then it got really, really bad. I thought lightning struck the plane at first.
TRAUS LOOCK (PH) PASSENGER: There was a big boom, and the kind of sound you don't want to hear when you're on an airplane. And I instantly put my shade up and I was pretty frightened to see that the engine on my side was missing.
KAFANOV: The Boeing 777 traveling from Denver to Honolulu experiencing engine failure minutes after takeoff.
BOB BROWN, PASSENGER: We looked at each other, my wife and I, and held hands and, I guess, wished our kids that we would see them again.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: I don't know what it is.
KAFANOV: Eyewitnesses on the ground seeing pieces of the aircraft falling from the sky in the Denver suburbs of Broomfield.
KIERAN CAIN, EYEWITNESS: I was playing on the basketball court, just having fun. An airplane was flying really high overhead, and basically what sounded like a sonic boom made everybody look up.
As we did, we could see there was a giant black cloud of smoke high up in the sky immediately followed by, you know, what looked like pieces of the aircraft really just coming off, and basically a shower of things that were falling out of the sky.
KAFANOV: The debris field spread over a mile, according to Broomfield police. Massive pieces of metal puncturing a roof, strewn over a soccer field and lawns. KIRBY KLEMENTS, EYEWITNESS: My wife and I were sitting inside the house just finishing up with the paper. and we heard this big bang. And we kind of looked at each other and go, what was that?
Then all of a sudden there was a bang and a crash and this object just rolled right in front of our house right out the front window. So I get up and look outside, and I'm trying to figure out what it is, and as soon as I open the door, I go, uh-oh, it's an engine part.
KAFANOV: It was just after 1:00 p.m. local When the pilot of the 777 with 241 people on board declared an emergency.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Mayday, mayday, United Air28, 328 heavy. Mayday, mayday aircraft.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: 328 heavy. Say again please. Repeat all that again.
[14:09:58]
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Yes, Denver. Departure United 328 heavy. Mayday. Aircraft just experienced engine failure. Need to turn immediately.
KAFANOV: The crew keeping the airplane under control and safely landing back at Denver International airport.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: My daughter was sitting at the window, and she was -- I was just like, don't look, let's close it up and let's just pray. So that's what we did. We kind of just held hands and said some prayers.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: We took some time to pray with each other and there were people around me praying. But I felt fairly confident that we were going to make it back to the airport.
KAFANOV: According to United, none of the passengers or crew suffered any injuries. And incredibly, no one on the ground was injured.
(on camera): This park, on a day like today when it's not as cold as it was last weekend, we could have hundreds of people here. And the fact that we are still not getting reports of any injuries, it's absolutely shocking at this point. It's amazing.
KAFANOV (voice over): Debris from the damaged is being taken to Denver Airport for analysis. The National Transportation Safety Board, the FAA and Boeing are investigating.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WHITFIELD: Lucy Kafanov, thank you so much.
All right. So more than 14 million people are still facing water problems in Texas after a deadly winter storm.
CNN's Natasha Chen is live for us in Houston.
NATASHA CHEN, CNN NATIONAL CORRESPONDENT: Yes. Another water distribution event is just getting underway here as Houston remains under a boil water notice.
Coming up, we can talk about what it will take to lift out of that notice and what it's like right now for so many people still without running water.
WHITFIELD: Plus, how much longer will we have to wear masks? CNN goes one on one with Dr. Anthony Fauci.
And then later, the U.S. Attorney General nominee Merrick Garland is expected to call the Capitol riot a quote, "heinous attack". Find out what else he plans to say about white supremacist at his confirmation hearing.
[14:11:50]
WHITFIELD: All right. Texas is warming up and thawing out, but the state remains in a major crisis. More than 14 million residents, about half the state's population, are still without clean water. They remain under a boil water advisory after the frigid temperatures froze or broke countless water pipes. The severe weather is to blame for at least 50 deaths in several states.
For the very latest, let's bring in Natasha Chen in Houston. So, residents there once again lining up this time to get their hands on water. Natasha, what are you seeing and hearing?
CHEN: Yes, Fred, you can tell by just the number of cars that are now pulling up right behind us, there are a lot of people here who really need bottled water at this time. That's because Houston remains under a boil water notice.
Now, the water pressure here has actually improved over the last few days, but the city says they've sent water samples to the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. That agency needs to approve those test samples and then the boil water notice can be lifted which the city hopes can happen as early as Monday.
145 boil water notices across the state have been lifted as of this morning, and that includes now Galveston which is about 50 miles southeast of here on the coast.
Now, as far as water disruption, still more than 14 million Texans don't have water service right now. That includes a couple of homeowners we met yesterday who said they've been hauling water from their neighbor's house four or five times a day just to flush toilets and wash their dishes.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
DELORES LOZANO, HOUSTON RESIDENT: I think I'm going to be sore by next week from just carrying jugs of water.
KORY HAYWOOD, HOUSTON RESIDENT: I know there is a two to three-week wait for plumbers right now in the city, and also the supplies are very low. So as soon as we can get some more pipes into the city, and as soon as we can get some more work and some more people.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
CHEN: They said at one point during the worst of the storm, it was colder inside their house than outside. They showed their home and the damage to a few congressmen yesterday, Representative Al Green, Representative Sylvia Garcia here in Texas and also to Representative Alexandria Ocasio Cortez, who flew in to Houston to volunteer and tour the area. She has helped raise now close to $4.7 million for Texas organizations and she plans to leave Houston today after more volunteering, Fred.
WHITFIELD: Wow. Yes, that's a big number and that's going to be a big help for a lot of people. So many folks who are so much colder in their house, that's why so many went to their cars to warm up, but that brought some potential dangers, too.
Natasha Chen, thank you so much.
All right. So for more now on the crisis in Texas, let's talk to Ron Nirenberg. He is the mayor of San Antonio, the second biggest city in the state. Mayor, good to see you.
MAYOR RON NIRENBERG (I), SAN ANTONIO, TEXAS: You too, Fredricka.
WHITFIELD: So give me an update now on the power and the water situation in your city.
NIRENBERG: Sure. Well, the sun and the weather have improved things here in San Antonio. And as you've seen our systems are starting to come back online. Virtually all of our service area with power is now on and we are starting to see some of the boil water notices lifted in San Antonio.
In fact, less than 10 percent of our service area was no longer getting service from water as of yesterday. So we do hope to see that improved over the hours to come.
The real challenge now though is as the sun comes out, we're revealing the damage and the suffering that's occurred. And so we've been out all day the last several days at distribution sites where people made clean potable water. They also need food because a lot of that is spoiled with power outages.
There's been, you know, a run on supplies. We're seeing a lot of the materials at plumbing stores and hardware stores, you know, begin to run out. And a lot of people still don't have water because they're in facilities whose power tripped pumps.
[14:19:57]
NIRENBERG: So there's still quite a lot of suffering, and we're dealing with all that right now.
WHITFIELD: So yesterday we talked with the mayor of Manor, Texas. I know that's about 80 miles, 100 miles outside of your city. And he expressed frustration with the lack of communication from county and state leaders and beyond during the crisis.
Take a listen.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
MAYOR LARRY WALLACE, MANOR TEXAS: Honestly, I have lost all faith in senior leadership. I have only heard from council members and fellow mayors that I've built relationships with around here, my county commissioner and our brand new county judge. Everybody else is a lost hope. I'm just going to be frank with it and that's how everybody feels.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WHITFIELD: So Mr. Mayor, have you had any better luck with communication with senior leadership? And if so, has it been helpful?
NIRENBERG: You know, it's been a challenge. The blackout was virtually a blackout on communications as well at the start of this, you know. But as things have started to thaw out, we are starting to get more communication and assistance from state leaders as well as federal leaders to bring relief to us.
The challenge though is when all this occurred, again, we weren't given any notice. We were planning on an ice event which typically freezes roadways. We were out there preparing infrastructure.
But when this hit in the middle of the night, it went from normal condition to critical condition and rolling blackouts with no notice. So there was very little opportunity for us to prepare our communities, and there was certainly no anticipation that those so- called rolling blackouts would basically leave folks freezing in their homes for almost a week.
WHITFIELD: It caught everybody by surprise, clearly. The mayor of Manor also, you know, expressed frustration with the local water company. The company did hear him in my interview yesterday and now says a key supply line broke and hopes to have it repaired today and bottled water will soon be delivered.
How about for you? I know you mentioned that there are were still a few water obstacles in your city. Is the water company coming to your aid? What's happening?
NIRENBERG: We are. So we have had central distribution points for volume water straight from the water utility for a couple days now. We've also had about 15 different locations for bottled water being distributed all around town. So that has been -- that has been good. There's been a lot of cooperation there.
We've also seen an incredible outpouring of support from our San Antonio Food Bank and volunteers, giving folks the essentials that they need.
The real challenge now is going to be in terms of fixing infrastructure, so we're seeing relief from the state and the Fed with regard to making funds reimbursable. We're also working locally with our public sector and private philanthropy to make sure that people don't have to wait to begin repairs.
We're cutting red tape so that we can ensure that repairs get underway quickly because as the weather has subsided, we're now starting to anticipate what will be a catastrophic crisis with regard to breakage in lines, piping in people's homes, things like that and the last people to bear more of this burden are the people who have been suffering in our communities for the last week through this weather event.
WHITFIELD: Right. And, you know, adding insult to injury, there are so many residents who are already beginning to endure major economic hardships because of this weather disaster.
In fact this morning, one Texas Congressman told CNN that he believes federal aid will help residents pay the bills. Listen.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
DANA BASH, CNN HOST: I assume you're going to do something to help people pay those bills. Are you saying you'll use the disaster relief funding from the federal government.
REP. MICHAEL MCCAUL (R-TX): Yes. Yes, that's the current plan with the federal assistance will be able to help the homeowners both to repair. We have a lot of waterways, a lot of water damage, pipes bursting but also their electricity bills as well.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WHITFIELD: So today the mayors of Houston and Fort Worth both said the state should pay for these sky-high water bills, power bills -- where are you on this?
NIRENBERG: Absolutely. It would be unconscionable for bills to go up and for bills to be put on the backs of residents of this state that have been suffering and freezing in their homes for the last week through no fault of their own.
This was a total failure by the state's energy management, and they need to be held accountable. And in doing so, certainly not put the cost of this crisis on the backs of Texans.
[14:24:50]
NIRENBERG: And as far as I'm concerned, that bill should be sent to ERCOT. And there will be hell to pay if there is any notion that the residents of this state should pay for this disaster.
WHITFIELD: All the best to you and everyone there in San Antonio, Mayor Ron Nirenberg. Thanks so much.
NIRENBERG: Thank you.
WHITFIELD: So as Texas begins thawing out from last week's storm, parts of the Midwest and Northeast are now bracing for more snow.
Right now six million people are under winter weather alerts from Colorado to Illinois. The area could get hit with another two to four inches tomorrow.
The Midwest has been digging out all winter long with many cities breaking snow records like Chicago which has seen 45 inches of snow so far this season. The city usually receives about 25 inches. Detroit received about 40 inches of snow, 10 inches above normal.
We'll be right back.
[14:25:46]
[14:30:17]
WHITFIELD: About 63 million coronavirus vaccine doses have now been administered across the United States. This as new research shows evidence that a single dose of Pfizer's coronavirus vaccine might be enough to significantly reduce disease. That data prompting renewed calls for the U.S. to delay second doses in order to prioritize first doses for more people now.
Dr. Anthony Fauci shooting that idea down in an interview with CNN's Dana Bash this morning, saying the nation's current vaccine schedule is backed up by data from clinical trials.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
DR. ANTHONY FAUCI, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF ALLERGY AND INFECTIOUS DISEASES: We know for sure that when you give a prime with the Pfizer followed by a boost 21 days later, that you get a 94 percent to 95 percent efficacy, and the difference between the level of antibodies after one dose versus two doses is about tenfold higher.
And that is really important, because when you have that high a degree comparable to the single dose alone, that's the cushion that you would like to have when you get a variant that isn't as well-protected against by the antibodies induced by the vaccine. But you have enough level to be able to prevent at least severe disease.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WHITFIELD: Joining me now to discuss, Dr. Celine Gounder, an infectious disease specialist and epidemiologist. She is also the host of the epidemic podcast.
Doctor, good to see you.
DR. CELINE GOUNDER, INFECTIOUS DISEASE SPECIALIST AND EPIDEMIOLOGIST: Good to see you.
WHITFIELD: Well, I'm going to guess that you agree with Dr. Fauci. How important are those points that he is making? GOUNDER: Right. There's an expression, an apple a day keeps the doctor away. And the way I think about the first and second dose of the vaccine, is the first dose gets you to ten apples, the second dose gets you to 100 apples. While ten apples might be enough for your common strain of the coronavirus, with these new variants, you may need 20 or 50. And so, in a sense, if you are using only one dose, you maybe selecting for those concerning and mutant variants.
And so, until we have data that shows otherwise, we really should be sticking with what we have, science from the clinical trials demonstrating as effective, and until proven otherwise, that's really the appropriate path to be taking.
WHITFIELD: OK. Something else Dr. Fauci said, he says it is possible that Americans still need to wear masks into 2022 to protect against coronavirus. You're one of the members of President Biden's former advisory board who called on the administration to widely recommend the use of N95 masks. So, how beneficial would that be?
GOUNDER: Our big concern right now is that we're seeing a dramatic rise in the B117 variant. This is the one that originated from the U.K. It is a much more contagious variants. So, it spreads from one person to another more easily. And it also causes more severe disease.
The CDC is estimating by the end of March, this is going to be the dominant strain here in the United States. This is why Dr. Fauci and Dr. Walensky at the CDC have recommended double masking. But for people working in extremely high risk setting, so for example people working in meat packing, food processing, the folks who are working as warden officers in jails and prisons, not to mention inmates, these are people at extremely high risk for exposure and infection where they don't have the ventilation that may have in hospitals for example to protect us. And we also have masks in addition to that.
WHITFIELD: I like the explanation of one doctor who said that when you are wearing the two, the great benefit of the cloth mask over it is that it will create the masks to fit tighter on your face so that you have, you know, fewer spaces in between the masks that many of us experience with the just one medical-grade masks.
So, House Democrats are expected to also pass President Biden's $1.9 trillion stimulus package this week. The bill includes a lot of things, $15 minimum federal wage, and funding for stimulus checks, schools in the rollout. But how concerned are you that those things could potentially delay the COVID response funding that is necessary?
GOUNDER: I am very hopeful that Congress will see the necessity of all of these different components. Unfortunately, small businesses have been left out in the cold over the last year where they have been forced to choose between their economic survival and public health.
[14:35:03]
We need to be supporting small businesses, restaurants, bars, gyms and the like to be able to do the right thing by public health without going themselves under. So those are the kinds of the provisions that are in this bill that make a lot of sense, and I think that we need to be passing that now.
WHITFIELD: All right. Dr. Celine Gounder, thank you so much.
Coronavirus relief is about to take center stage in Washington, D.C. The House is expected to take up the $1.9 trillion bill this week. Now, there are questions about the price tag and a proposal to increase minimum wage.
WHITFIELD: All right. It's going to be a critical week on Capitol Hill. The House is set to debate and likely pass President Biden's $1.9 trillion COVID package. It's the first real legislative test for the new Biden administration and it comes as the U.S. Senate begins the confirmation process for Biden's U.S. general attorney nominee Merrick Garland.
[14:40:04]
CNN's Suzanne Malveaux and Arlette Saenz are following all of these developments.
Suzanne, let's begin with you.
What will this process to pass Biden's bill likely look like?
SUZANNE MALVEAUX, CNN NATIONAL CORRESPONDENT: Fred, it's going to happen very fast, just within a couple weeks. Tomorrow is when the House budget committee will take up this massive bill. It will hand it off to the full house for a vote by the end of the week, then it goes back and forth from the Senate, back to the House. The key deadline, of course, March 14th. That is when some critical unemployment benefits will expire. So they're hoping the president will sign it before that.
Much of what's in this bill Democrats can agree on, the $1,400 stimulus checks, the child tax credits, as well as money for vaccinations and schools. What is controversial here, of course, is the $15 minimum wage increase. Progressives in the party are pushing saying this must be included in this relief package, but it is far from certain that that's going to happen. They are debating fiercely this weekend.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
REP. PRAMILA JAYAPAL (D-WA): This $15 minimum wage increase would mean 13 million Americans would get a raise, a million Americans would come out of poverty, and 30 percent of those minimum wage workers are Black, 25 percent are Latinx. It is absolutely essential that we do it, and I believe the Senate will do it.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
MALVEAUX: So, Fred, first, the Senate parliamentarian would have to rule and say it's okay to have this in a budget bill, that it's not an extraneous type of provision, in order to get that simple majority for this pass. So, that is the first hurdle. The second, of course, is there are some Democratic senators who believe that they should be included within this COVID package. So, it is not likely, Fred, that this is going to pass with that minimum wage requirement.
WHITFIELD: And, Arlette, President Biden is defending this massive $1.9 trillion price tag. What are you hearing from the White House?
ARLETTE SAENZ, CNN WHITE HOUSE CORRESPONDENT: Well, Fred, the White House is aware that they are entering this critical stretch as this bill is set to move through the House and make its way over to the Senate.
And on Friday, the president defended that $1.9 trillion price tag and calling on the Republicans to point out exactly what they would cut from the bill. But he did say he that is open to hearing ideas on how to make it less expensive. So we will see whether there's actually any room for negotiation once this bill makes it over to the Senate, but at this moment, the White House seems as if they are on track to pass this without Republicans' support.
Now, as Suzanne was talking about, one big question is that $15 federal minimum wage, and whether that remains in the bill, the White House has insisted it is a priority for the president, that is why he included it in his initial request. This is even as the president has spoken both publicly and privately saying that it may not actually survive in the final legislation. But bottom line here, this is really a critical three-week test for the Biden administration.
The president has promised that relief will come quickly to Americans, and as they are looking to push this bill through, that is how he is trying to make good on the promise, especially when you think about the fact that those unemployment benefits are set to expire three weeks from today.
WHITFIELD: And, Suzanne, it is not just about the bill, right? Tomorrow, the U.S. Senate is set to begin the confirmation hearing for U.S. Attorney General Nominee Merrick Garland. What are you learning about that?
MALVEAUX: As far as we know, that likely he will pass this nomination process, that he will get -- become the attorney general, but not without some very tough questions ahead of time. The big question, of course, and this is something that Senator Mitch McConnell had introduced, whether or not there would be criminal charges, investigations from the Justice Department. That will be questions that will becoming to him, also, how he is going to handle the riots that occur at the U.S. Capitol, January 6.
He released a part of his opening remarks, statements saying here, emphasizing the importance of rule of law and civil rights, saying, if confirmed, I will supervise the prosecution of white supremacists and others who stormed the capitol on January 6, a heinous attack that sought to disrupt the cornerstone of our democracy, the peaceful transition of power to a newly elected government.
But he will also be asked as well, Fred, as we know from Senator Lindsey Graham, the Judiciary Committee, about investigations regarding the president's son Hunter Biden, as well as the New York Governor Andrew Cuomo about investigations into whether or not they will be pursued, whether or not this Justice Department and this attorney general will move forward on those as well -- Fred.
WHITFIELD: All right. There's a lot potentially on the plate.
Suzanne Malveaux, Arlette Saenz, thank you so much.
So, it has been exactly a month since that transition of power, since President Biden's swearing in. And now, another signal that his predecessor may be dipping his toe back into the political arena. Donald Trump is set to speak at CPAC a week from today. It will be his first public appearance since leaving the White House.
[14:45:00]
And now, some of Trump's family members say the former president maybe open to taking another shot at the White House.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
LARA TRUMP, FORMER SENIOR ADVISOR TO TRUMP CAMPAIGN: He has indicated that he probably would be interested in running again in 2024. Look, he is the head of the Republican Party. He is really the person that everyone will continue to turn to in order to help them get across the line, whether we're talking about 2022 or beyond, I think. This man has changed politics and he's changed our party, the Republican Party.
(END VIDEO CLIP) WHITFIELD: But notably absent from the event, his former vice president, Mike Pence, who declined an invitation. It comes as the Republican Party faces an identity crisis with some members saying the GOP should move beyond the former president.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
GOV. ASA HUTCHINSON (R), ARKANSAS: I would not support him for re- election in 2024. He is going to have a voice, but as former presidents do, but there is many voices in the party, and again, he should not define our future. We have to define it for ourselves, and that has to be based upon the principles that really gave us the strength in America.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WHITFIELD: And speaking of presidents, tonight, Lincoln's story continues. See how his debates with Steven Douglas over the expansion of slavery propelled him on to the national stage and helped him to pave the way to his presidency. "LINCOLN: DIVIDED WE STAND" continues tonight at 10:00 Eastern on CNN.
And we'll be right back.
[14:51:03]
WHITFIELD: All right. This was the reaction last week in the NASA control room when the Mars rover "Perseverance" touched down.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Touchdown confirmed! "Perseverance" safely on the surface of Mars, ready to begin seeking the sands of past life.
(CHEERS AND APPLAUSE)
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WHITFIELD: Ooh, that was some excitement.
Well, the Mars rover immediately began sending back some spectacular pictures and it began the two-year mission of sending back signs of life on the Red Planet.
And one of those cheering most loudly from home was a student at Georgia Tech University senior Breanna Ivey helped to test out the math used by the rover as it moves around, while she was on an internship with NASA's mobility team last year.
And she's joining me right now.
Congratulations, Breanna.
BREANNA IVEY, GEORGIA TECH STUDENT/ASSISTED ON MARS ROVER MISSION: Thank you so much. Thank you.
WHITFIELD: Oh my guys. Did you, you know, feel like those in the control room? Were you cheering, jumping up and down at home? What happened?
IVEY: Absolutely. Watching the rover landing was like watching a movie. I was on the edge of my seat. It was so exciting to see it land successfully. It was so exciting.
WHITFIELD: Wow. So, when you were part of that project last year, did you see this really could happen, that all of the work you put into it could actually help make things happen on Mars with perseverance?
IVEY: To be honest, I really didn't think about it, I was just so focused on doing my job and doing it well that this week has just been extraordinary, to actually see something that I had a role in, landing on Mars successfully, has been incredible. This is the week I actually realized what I was doing and what has happened.
WHITFIELD: Wow. I mean, you helped do this. That is tremendous. And I love the smile on your face.
So you worked on checking some of the math used to tell rover how to move while it was on its mission. Is there a way for us, you know, neophytes to understand how you went about that? Explain it to me. IVEY: Sure of the one of the abilities of the rover is you should be able to put in a location for the rover to travel to autonomously. So my job was to make sure that all the distances and all angles and any mathematical transformation that had to be done were being done correctly by the rover. And it was a lot of math and simulation and coding, that type of thing, but it was a great learning experience and it was a lot of fun.
WHITFIELD: Oh, this is so great. So, you did this because you love it. But that you are doing it also means that you are a role model, especially to young black boys and girls everywhere.
What do you want to convey to encourage everyone, all young people, and most especially, perhaps, women and men of color to be leaders in STEM sciences?
IVEY: Two things really stand out that I would like to say. The first is always trust your journey and your process no matter what obstacles you may encounter or what odds are against you, because you have all the tools to be successful and you are capable. The second thing is always know that you belong in whatever space you set foot in, every conversation that's being had, every place you step foot in, you have something important to say and you are valuable. And don't be afraid to be in those places because you will change the world.
WHITFIELD: Oh, I love it. I could not have said it better, nobody else could have said it better than you.
Breanna Ivey, thank you so much. Congratulations, you're such an amazing, amazing inspiration.
IVEY: Thank you.
WHITFIELD: All the best to you. I can't wait to hear more because I know there's more coming from you in the near future. So, we'll have you back on and let's talk about your future and what you have planned.
Fantastic, Breanna, thank you.
All right. Straight ahead, one of the suspects in the Capitol Hill riot claims she met with the Secret Service before the insurrection, and that's not all.
[14:55:02]
We'll have the shocking new details, next.
WHITFIELD: Hello again, everyone. Thank you so much for joining me. I'm Fredricka Whitfield.
Load-Date: February 21, 2021



End of Document


MAYOR SYLVESTER TURNER (D), HOUSTON, TX IS INTERVIEWED ON CNN "NEWSROOM"
CQ Transcriptions
February 21, 2021 Sunday

Copyright  2021 CQ-Roll Call, Inc.	All Rights Reserved
All materials herein are protected by United States copyright law and may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, displayed, published or broadcast without the prior written permission of CQ Transcriptions. You may not alter or remove any trademark, copyright or other notice from copies of the content.
Body




EVENT DATE: February 21, 2021
TYPE: NEWS EVENT
SPEAKER: MAYOR SYLVESTER TURNER (D), HOUSTON, TX
FREDRICKA WHITFIELD, CNN HOST:  For the very latest, let's bring in Natasha Chen in Houston, where residents are once again lining up this time for some relief, and you've got the Mayor with us as well.   
NATASHA CHEN, CNN NATIONAL CORRESPONDENT:  That's right, Fred. The city has now given out more than two million bottled water to people here.   
      Mayor, can you tell us what the current situation is? A lot of people still don't have running water and there's still a boil water notice here.   
MAYOR SYLVESTER TURNER (D), HOUSTON, TEXAS:  There's still a boil water notice. The goal that we were shooting for was to be able to get that lifted on Monday, it could be sooner. I will tell you, the system has normalized. The pressure is good.   
      And based on our internal sampling, I think things are good. But we're waiting for the State to give us the greenlight. So that could -- that literally could happen at any moment.   
      I've said, Monday, but hopefully before. They are still -- but even with that, there are still people, thousands of families across the Houston region with busted water pipes, which means they don't have water. They've had to turn off their water.   
      So even with the boil water notice, if that is lifted really soon, they're still going to need water.   
CHEN:  Exactly. And you've talked about the shortage of plumbers and the shortage of supplies. So people are having trouble getting those pipes fixed.   
TURNER:  And the reason being is because you're dealing with a statewide crisis. It's not just like in a hurricane where certain portions of the state, this is statewide.   
      So even if you can find a plumber, plumbers still having to find the supplies and the materials. I made a request on F.E.M.A., to provide additional licensed plumbers, supplies, materials, all of that as quickly as possible, along with water.   
CHEN:  And it's important, as you said to, for people to check and make sure that the person they're hiring is licensed from wherever they are.   
TURNER:  You would like to think that everybody is good, and people are who they represent themselves to be. But it's very important that people check a licensed plumber. You could go on the Texas registry to find them.   
      And if they're plumbers, for example, coming from out of the state coming in, they still need to be licensed and you still need to be able to -- should be able to look them up. But don't -- but don't just, just because someone says that he or she is a plumber, don't put out the money that you have and then end up not getting your home repaired.   
CHEN:  Now yesterday, we visited a home in Houston. The homeowners also have busted pipes. And one of their concerns is their perception that they told us that the more affluent neighborhood seemed to get taken care of first in disasters after hurricanes, and now during the storm with power restoration, with water service. What do you say to people who have that complaint?   
TURNER:  Well, you know, in many cases, based on historical precedent, that is the case. You know, I grew up in one of those communities that is under served and under resourced, I still live in that same neighborhood. So in many cases, that has been the case.   
      But we, in this city, we have been laser focused on making sure that we have equity in everything, equity in the repairs. So the power has been restored across the city. With respect to the water pressure, that's being restored across the city.   
      We're being very sensitive to communities that are already on the margins, have suffered incredible from Hurricane Harvey, from the coronavirus, and now they're dealing with the blackouts.   
      So I understand their concerns, but let me assure them that we see them. We are very sensitive to their needs. We don't want those who are at risk, more vulnerable to be on the back end of anything.   
      So we're going to do our very best to make sure that there's equity in distribution just like on this water distribution.   
      Yesterday, mass distribution in the Northeast, which is a community of color, a lower socioeconomic area, and so we've been all over moving things around. But I do understand that, but we're not going to leave anyone behind.   
CHEN:  Thank you, Mayor. And I know you've been putting bottles of water in these cars as well. So thank you.   
      And, Fred, as he mentioned, the greenlight from the State could be coming soon to lift the boil water notice here in Houston. Already as of this morning, 154 boil water notices have been lifted across the state.   
      So slowly, but surely, some improvements. But still, more than 14 million Texans are seeing water service disruption at this time -- Fred.   
WHITFIELD:  Right. Still a long way to go. All right, Natasha Chen, Mayor Turner, thanks to both of you. Appreciate it.  
      END   
Load-Date: February 22, 2021



End of Document





Texas warms up: Electricity returns and water repairs underway; Boil water notices were lifted in Houston, and electricity was returned to most homes and business in Texas this weekend.
The Christian Science Monitor
February 21, 2021 Sunday

Copyright 2021 Christian Science Publishing Society All Rights Reserved
Section: USA
Length: 1749 words
Byline: Jake Bleiberg and Mark Scolforo Associated Press
Body




Higher temperatures spread across the southern United States this weekend, bringing relief to a winter-weary region that faces a challenging clean-up and expensive repairs from days of extreme cold and widespread power outages.
In hard-hit Texas, where millions were warned to boil tap water before drinking it, the warm-up was expected to last for several days. The thaw produced burst pipes throughout the region, adding to the list of woes from severe conditions that were blamed for more than 70 deaths.
By Saturday afternoon, the sun had come out in Dallas and temperatures were nearing the 50s. People emerged to walk and jog in residential neighborhoods after days indoors. Many roads had dried out, and patches of snow were melting. Snowmen slumped.
Linda Nguyen woke up in a Dallas hotel room Saturday morning with an assurance she hadn't had in nearly a week: She and her cat had somewhere to sleep with power and water.
Electricity had been restored to her apartment on Wednesday. But when Nguyen arrived home from work the next evening, she found a soaked carpet. A pipe had burst in her bedroom.
"It's essentially unlivable," said Nguyen, 27, who works in real estate. "Everything is completely ruined."
Deaths attributed to the weather include a man at an Abilene health care facility where the lack of water pressure made medical treatment impossible. Officials also reported deaths from hypothermia, including homeless people and those inside buildings with no power or heat. Others died in car accidents on icy roads or from suspected carbon monoxide poisoning.
Roughly half the deaths reported so far occurred in Texas, with multiple fatalities also in Tennessee, Kentucky, Oregon and a few other Southern and Midwestern states.
A Tennessee farmer died trying to save two calves from a frozen pond.
President Joe Biden's office said Saturday he has declared a major disaster in Texas, directing federal agencies to help in the recovery.
U.S. Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, a New York Democrat, tweeted Saturday that she helped raise more than $3 million toward relief. She was soliciting help for a Houston food bank, one of 12 Texas organizations she said would benefit from the donations.
The storms left more than 300,000 still without power across the country on Saturday, many of them in Texas, Louisiana and Mississippi.
More than 50,000 Oregon electricity customers were among those without power, more than a week after an ice storm ravaged the electrical grid. Portland General Electric had hoped to have service back to all but 15,000 customers by Friday night. But the utility discovered additional damage in previously inaccessible areas.
Oregon Gov. Kate Brown ordered the National Guard to go door-to-door in some areas to check on residents' welfare. At its peak, what was the worst ice storm in 40 years knocked out power to more than 350,000 customers.
In West Virginia, Appalachian Power was working on a list of about 1,500 places that needed repair, as about 44,000 customers in the state remained without electricity after experiencing back-to-back ice storms Feb. 11 and Feb. 15. More than 3,200 workers were attempting to get power back online, their efforts spread across the six most affected counties on Saturday.
In Wayne County, West Virginia, workers had to replace the same pole three times because trees kept falling on it.
Texas Gov. Greg Abbott met Saturday with legislators from both parties to discuss energy prices as Texans face massive spikes in their electric bills after wholesale energy prices skyrocketed while power plants were offline.
"We have a responsibility to protect Texans from spikes in their energy bills" resulting from the weather, he said in a statement.
Water woes added misery for people across the South who went without heat or electricity for days after the ice. Snow storms forced rolling blackouts from Minnesota to Texas.
Robert Tuskey was retrieving tools from the back of his pickup truck Saturday afternoon as he prepared to fix a water line at a friend's home in Dallas.
"Everything's been freezing," Tuskey said. "I even had one in my own house ... of course I'm lucky I'm a plumber."
Tuskey, 49, said his plumbing business has had a stream of calls for help from friends and relatives with burst pipes. "I'm fixing to go help out another family member," he said. "I know she ain't got no money at all, but they ain't got no water at all, and they're older."
In Jackson, Mississippi, most of the city of about 161,000 lacked running water, and officials blamed city water mains that are more than 100 years old and not built for freezing weather.
The city was providing water for flushing toilets and drinking. But residents had to pick it up, leaving the elderly and those living on icy roads vulnerable.
Incoming and outgoing passenger flights at Memphis International Airport resumed Saturday after all flights were canceled Friday because of water pressure problems. The issues hadn't been resolved, but airport officials set up temporary restroom facilities.
Prison rights advocates said some correctional facilities across Louisiana had intermittent electricity and frozen pipes, affecting toilets and showers.
The men who are sick, elderly or being held not in dormitories but in cell blocks - small spaces surrounded by concrete walls - were especially vulnerable, according to Voice of the Experienced, a grassroots organization founded and run by formerly incarcerated people. The group said one man at Elayn Hunt Correctional Center, just south of Baton Rouge, described a thin layer of ice on his walls.
Cammie Maturin said she spoke to men at the 6,300-inmate Louisiana State Penitentiary in Angola who were given no extra provisions to protect themselves from the cold.
"They give them no extra blankets. No extra anything. For them, it's just been fend for yourself," said Maturin, president of the nonprofit H.O.P.E. Foundation.
In many areas, water pressure dropped after lines froze and because people left faucets dripping to prevent pipes from icing, authorities said.
As of Saturday, 1,445 public water systems in Texas had reported disrupted operations, said Toby Baker executive director of the state Commission on Environmental Quality. Government agencies were using mobile labs and coordinating to speed water testing.
That's up from 1,300 reporting issues Friday afternoon. But Baker said the number of affected customers had dropped slightly. Most were under boil-water orders, with 156,000 lacking water service entirely.
"It seems like last night we may have seen some stabilization in the water systems across the state," Baker said.
The Saturday thaw after 11 days of freezing temperatures in Oklahoma City left residents with burst water pipes, inoperable wells and furnaces knocked out of operation by brief power blackouts.
Rhodes College in Memphis said Friday that about 700 residential students were being moved to hotels in the suburbs of Germantown and Collierville after school bathrooms stopped functioning because of low water pressure.
Memphis, Tennessee, saw 10 inches of snow last week. Memphis, Light, Gas & Water issued a boil-water advisory on Thursday out of concern that low water pressure caused by problems at aging pumping stations and water main ruptures could lead to contamination. The advisory was still in place Sunday; utility officials said they did not know when they might lift it.
About 260,000 homes and businesses were under the advisory. Hospitals and nursing homes have been forced to switch to bottled water. The Tennessee National Guard was supplying St. Francis Hospital with water.
City officials planned to distribute water bottles at several locations Sunday. Grocery stores struggled to keep shelves stocked with bottled water. Many restaurants remained closed.
Flights resumed Saturday at Memphis International Airport after everything was grounded Friday because of water pressure problems. Some problems still lingered, but airport officials set up temporary restrooms.
Firefighters extinguished a blaze at a fully occupied 102-room hotel in Killeen, Texas, about 70 miles (110 kilometers) north of Austin, late Friday. The hotel's sprinkler system didn't work because of frozen pipes, authorities said Saturday.
Flames shot from the top of the four-story hotel, and three people required medical care. Displaced guests were taken to a nearby Baptist church.
Texas electrical grid operators said electricity transmission returned to normal after the historic snowfall and single-digit temperatures created a surge in demand that buckled the state's system.
Smaller outages remained, but Bill Magness, president of the Electric Reliability Council of Texas, said the grid now can provide power throughout the system.
Abbott ordered an investigation into the failure for a state known as the U.S. energy capital. ERCOT officials have defended their preparations and the decision to begin forced outages Monday as the grid reached breaking point.
The blackouts resulted in at least two lawsuits filed against ERCOT and utilities, including one filed by the family of an 11-year-old boy who is believed to have died from hypothermia. The lawsuits claim ERCOT ignored repeated warnings of weaknesses in the state's power infrastructure.
Also, Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton issued civil investigative demands to ERCOT and electric utility companies. His investigation will address power outages, emergency plans, energy pricing and more related to the winter storm.
President Joe Biden is eager to visit Texas, which was hit especially hard by the weather, Psaki said. Biden hopes to travel to the state this week but "doesn't want to take away resources" from the response, she said. Biden declared a major disaster in Texas on Saturday.
"He is . . . very mindful of the fact that it's not a light footprint for a president to travel to a disaster area.
Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner told CBS' "Face the Nation" Sunday that Biden can come anytime.
"We certainly would welcome him," Turner said.
Texas Rep. Michael McCaul told CNN's "State of the Union" Sunday that federal disaster relief can be used to repair burst pipes and flood damage and to help Texans hit with skyrocketing energy bills.
___
Scolforo reported from Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.
___
Associated Press journalists Gillian Flaccus in Portland, Oregon; Ellen Knickmeyer in Oklahoma City; Jim Mustian in New York; Terry Wallace in Dallas; Jonathan J. Cooper in Phoenix; and Kimberlee Kruesi in Boise, Idaho contributed.
Load-Date: February 21, 2021



End of Document


Here's how a week of frigid weather and catastrophe unfolded in Texas
CNN Wire
February 21, 2021 Sunday 1:05 PM GMT

Copyright 2021 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved
Length: 1809 words
Byline: By Christina Maxouris, CNN
Dateline: (CNN) 
Body




             After a devastating week for the Lone Star state, finally some relief.
Temperatures Sunday will continue to warm, with most of the state expected to reach the 60s and 70s -- much closer to the average temperatures residents expect during this time of year.
But many Texans have only just begun recovering from the unprecedented devastation that the brutal winter storms unleashed over the past seven days.
At least 26 people died across the state since February 11.
Millions lost their power, forcing families to huddle over a fireplace, scavenge for firewood or spend nights in their car trying to stay warm. Others spent hours searching for food as shelves emptied and weather conditions led to food supply chain problems. The frigid temperatures caused pipes to burst, leading to water disruptions for roughly half the state's population.
Covid-19 relief efforts, including food banks, were shuttered. Vaccine shipments were delayed and many appointments were canceled.
Here's how the past week unfolded across the state.
Monday
More than a third of the continental US records below-zero temperatures. Snow, icy roads and power outages are beginning to paralyze cities across the country, sparking emergency declarations in several states. 
Among them, Texas, which is beginning to feel the first impacts of what will be a brutal week.
"The window to prepare for this historic storm has closed as the time to hunker down is here," Harris County, Texas, Judge Lina Hidalgo warns.
Temperatures across the state are historically low: Dallas dips to 5 degrees Fahrenheit -- the coldest temperature the city has seen since 1989, while Austin and San Antonio both had single-digit temperatures for the first time in more than 30 years.
For some Texans, rolling blackouts begin early Mondaymorning after the Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT) -- a grid operator controlling about 90% of the state's electric load -- announces it is experiencing a "record-breaking electric demand."
Residents bundle up under several layers of blankets or move into their cars for hours hoping to stay warm and charge their electronic devices. State leaders deploy the National Guard to conduct welfare checks on residents and the state opens about 135 warming centers.
"I've duct taped my doors and windows to slow the temperature drop and I'm in multiple layers of clothing, in multiple blankets using my cats for warmth," Chey Louis, in Irving, said. 
Tuesday
More than four million customers are in the dark across Texas on Tuesday. Officials in the state call for answers from ERCOT, with the governor slamming the group's handling as "unacceptable."
"The Electric Reliability Council of Texas has been anything but reliable over the past 48 hours," Texas Gov. Greg Abbott says in a statement. "Far too many Texans are without power and heat for their homes as our state faces freezing temperatures and severe winter weather."
Among those residents is Barbara Martinez, who's been reloading her fireplace to keep her elderly parents, two dogs and herself warm.
"We are running out of firewood," Martinez said. "My goal today is to find more firewood."
As others try to stay warm, officials report a growing death toll as well as dozens of cases of carbon monoxide poisoning.
Houston police report that a woman and a girl died of carbon monoxide poisoning after a car was running in the garage at their home, trying to create heat because the power was out. Another person died in Fort Worth from a carbon monoxide incident, fire officials there said.
Meanwhile, weather conditions result in more than 550 vehicle crashes between Sunday and Tuesday in the Houston area alone, Police Chief Art Acevedo said. In addition to the two carbon monoxide deaths, Acevedo reported two more deaths, including a homeless person believed to have died from the weather and one traffic-related fatality.
And now, more areas begin to report another problem: water disruptions.
Water leaks caused by the weather prompt San Angelo city officials to issue a boil-water notice.
"We have been advising people to drip their faucets to prevent pipes from freezing, however due to low water pressure and supply concerns, we are asking citizens to refrain from doing this as much as possible so that we can conserve as much water as possible," officials said in a tweet.
Wednesday
At least 3.4 million customers in Texas remain without power Wednesday morning. 
Jordan Orta told CNN she slept in her car Tuesday night with her 2-year-old son because her San Antonio home got too cold without power.
"I was worried that my son, being that he's only 2, he's tiny and I just wanted to make sure he was okay," she told CNN. "So I made the decision to start up the car and sit in the heater for a little while."
Meanwhile, authorities in San Antonio say they've been refilling oxygen bottles at homes, as 911 calls are pouring in from residents reporting their supplies are out.
With so many houses still in the dark, Gov. Abbott vows for an investigation into ERCOT.
ERCOT CEO Bill Magness explains the issue was largely a lack of energy supply as the cold weather shuttered power facilities.  ERCOT's controlled power outages, he said, helped avert the system's collapse.
"If we had waited, and not done outages, not reduced demand to reflect what was going on, on the overall system, we could have drifted towards a blackout," he said. "People feel like what we're seeing feels like a blackout, but the blackout that can occur if you don't keep the supply and demand in balance could last months."
Why so many people lost power 
The power outages, which led to burst pipes in unheated homes, are also hampering water plants.
In Abilene, McMurry University says it is allowing campus residents to use water from the campus swimming pool to flush their toilets.
In Friendswood, Sandra Erickson said her home got so cold that pipes burst and sent the ceiling collapsing in three different rooms.
It was like a "hurricane catastrophe," she told CNN.
Thursday
Almost 290,000 customers across Texas are left without power by Thursday, a strong improvement from the millions without power earlier. But another round of frigid temperatures puts more than 22 million people across the South under a hard freeze warning, delaying any potential recovery.
While the tally of households in the dark grows smaller, other disasters take shape.
Some 13.5 million people throughout Texas have experienced water disruptions, with nearly 800 water systems reporting issues like frozen or broken pipes, according to Toby Baker, executive director for the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. About 725 systems are under a boil-water advisory, Baker said.
One Crestview resident told CNN they began grabbing snow off their balcony and are storing it to use as drinking water if their supply doesn't return soon.
Officials also announce food shortages, further complicating the dire situation for Texans.
"Grocery stores are already unable to get shipments of dairy products. Store shelves are already empty," Texas Agriculture Commissioner Sid Miller said. "We're looking at a food supply chain problem like we've never seen before, even with Covid-19."
Fort Worth resident Philip Shelley said his pregnant wife and 11-month-old daughter struggled to stay warm and fed.
"(Ava) is down to half a can of formula," Shelley said. "Stores are out if not extremely low on food. Most of our food in the refrigerator is spoiled. Freezer food is close to thawed but we have no way to heat it up."
Friday
Among those hard hit in the state are hospitals. President and CEO of Houston Methodist Dr. Marc Bloom, who is in charge of seven hospitals in the Houston area, says two of his facilities were completely without water for days. One of the hospitals collected rainwater to flush toilets, he said.
"It's frustrating," he told CNN. "I'm just glad that we were able to respond, that we were able to manage."
Nearly half of the state's population continues to face disruptions in water service due to burst or frozen pipes, many of who remain under boil-water advisories. About 190,000 homes and businesses are still without power.
In Austin alone, the state capital's water supply lost 325 million gallons due to burst pipes, Austin Water Director Greg Meszaros said in a Thursday news conference.
"The fire department indicated they have responded to thousands upon thousands of burst pipes," Meszaros said.
Austin resident Jenn Studebaker's home has power, but no water. She told CNN that all week, her family slept around the fireplace and burned chairs and bookshelves to keep warm before scavenging for more wood.
Now without water, they're melting snow and storing it in their bathtub.
"It's been constant," she told CNN. "We're exhausted, honestly."
Saturday
About 85,000 households across Texas remain left in the dark. President Joe Biden approves a major disaster declaration for Texas, unlocking more federal resources to assist the state.
Water disruptions and a depleting pile of supplies are still a concern in homes, businesses and hospitals.
"This was a sprawling natural disaster that hit us statewide and arrived on top of the pandemic," Texas Hospital Association spokeswoman Carrie Williams said.
By Saturday morning, more than 15 million people had been impacted by water disruptions statewide, one official told CNN.
As parts of the state begin the slow process toward recovery, more details are unveiled about the devastation of the past week.
Marty Miles, the general manager of a hotel group in Galveston, said the demand was overwhelming as residents tried to find a warm place to stay. Miles said that for several days their only power came from an emergency generator, and they had no water for a little more than two days.
"The hardest part is that you don't know when it's going to stop," Miles said. "Because of the rolling blackouts and not knowing when the water would be back, it was a complete stop and go, stop and go. ... So every time we thought we were in the clear, two hours later, it started over."
While thousands remain in the dark, officials have also now began investigating outrageous hikes in some customers' energy bills as a result of the storm.
"It is unacceptable for Texans who suffered through days in the freezing cold without electricity or heat to now be hit with skyrocketing energy costs," the governor said in a statement, adding he was working with other state leaders to find solutions and "ensure that Texans are not on the hook for unreasonable spikes in their energy bills."         
             CNN's Brandon Miller, Mallika Kallingal, Chuck Johnston, Travis Caldwell, Adrienne Vogt, Haley Brink, Eric Levenson, Madeline Holcombe, Keith Allen, Konstantin Toropin and Artemis Moshtaghian contributed to this report.         
TM & © 2021 Cable News Network, Inc., a Time Warner Company. All rights reserved.
Load-Date: March 22, 2021



End of Document


Boeing 777 Engine Failure Rains Debris Over Denver Suburb; Houston Lifts Boil Water Advisory After Five Days; Merrick Garland's Confirmation Hearing For Attorney General Begins Monday; America Is Back; COVID Deaths And Vaccinations; GOP Election Fraud Doner. Aired 4-5p ET
CNN CNN NEWSROOM 4:00 PM EST
February 21, 2021 Sunday

Copyright 2021 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved 
Section: NEWS; Domestic
Length: 6482 words
Byline: Erica Hill, Omar Jimenez, Pete Muntean, Natasha Chen, Suzanne Malveaux, David Gergen, Susan Glasser, Jonathan Reiner, Randi Kaye
Guests: Jim Hall, William Schaffner
Highlight: Pieces of debris, some very large, scattered over a Denver suburb after United Airlines flight encountered engine failure and had to turn back to the airport. No one was hurt in the incident but investigators are currently looking into the possible cause of the failure. Much of the winter weather is gone in Texas but many families are still desperate for water and food. Merrick Garland is said to highlight the independence and integrity of the Justice Department in his opening statement to Congress during his confirmation hearing as attorney general.
Body




[16:00:00]
FREDRICKA WHITFIELD, CNN HOST: I'm Fredricka Whitfield. CNN NEWSROOM with Erica Hill starts right now.
ERICA HILL, CNN HOST: Good afternoon, you're live in the CNN NEWSROOM. I'm Erica Hill in New York, in for Ana Cabrera.
It is the airline disaster that almost was. People in a Denver suburb still rattled and amazed today at their narrow escape. Huge pieces of a United Airlines plane raining down in their neighborhood.
Today we have brand-new images including some frightening video of airplane parts crashing into the ground from 10,000 feet in the air.
All of this happening in Broomfield, Colorado. It was right in the flight path of planes taking off from Denver International Airport. Now incredibly no one on the ground was hurt by the debris falling from that Boeing 777. The debris field, a mile long, littered with pieces large and small, some of them several feet long.
(Voice-over): You see this one as well which has gotten so much attention. Some pieces weighing hundreds of pounds. Some homes and vehicles damaged by the impact. But again really remarkable that no one was injured.
(On camera): CNN aviation correspondent Pete Muntean is with us, CNN national correspondent Omar Jimenez is as well. He is in Denver where that United Airlines flight departed from Denver International Airport just over 24 hours ago.
Omar, we'll go first to you with the very latest.
OMAR JIMENEZ, CNN NATIONAL CORRESPONDENT: Yes, Erica, this is the situation, as you know, that could have been so much worse. This was a flight that was bound for Honolulu from here at Denver International Airport Saturday afternoon, and thankfully it wasn't over water when they had to make the decision to turn back around.
Now, as part of -- the miraculous part of this entire story is that as this plane was going, pieces, some fragments, but huge pieces from this aircraft were falling into neighborhoods below. The neighborhoods of Broomfield, Colorado, outside of Denver. And while we did see damage to at least some vehicles, minor damage to some homes, homes could have been destroyed. People could have been killed or at the very least injured. That didn't happen. Somehow.
And while all of that was happening on the ground, up in the air, passengers described hearing a big boom, and they looked over to the right and saw that damaged engine missing pieces that had clearly at that point already fallen down to earth.
Now, people get made fun of for clapping when planes land. But in this case I think it was appropriate because they turned around. They were able to get back down safely. Passengers cheered as they exited unscathed, guided through this entire experience by the pilots and crew of this. But now quite literally, the pieces of this investigation are being picked up by the National Transportation Safety Board to try and figure out how this could have happened -- Erica.
HILL: Yes. Really, I mean, just kudos to the pilots and the flight crew there, to the folks in air traffic control.
Pete, as we look at this, the big question, we know that there was engine failure. But do we know anything more about exactly what happened in those moments after takeoff?
PETE MUNTEAN, CNN AVIATION CORRESPONDENT: Few details still publicly available about why this engine failed. The right engine of this 777 in such a dramatic way. What's so interesting here is that we can now hear on the air traffic control audio the fire alarms going off inside the flight deck as the crew declared that original mayday call.
I want you to hear it now, what they said to air traffic control in Denver.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Mayday, mayday, United Air 328, heavy mayday, mayday, aircraft --
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: 328, Heavy, say again -- repeat all that again?
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Denver departure United 328 Heavy mayday aircraft, just experienced engine failure. Need to return immediately.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
MUNTEAN: This is going to be so important for the National Transportation Safety Board, which is just beginning its investigation. Not only will it zero in on the actions of the crew. It will also zero in on that engine, a Pratt & Whitney PW 4,000, according to United Airlines.
This is an engine that has had failures like this before. In fact, the United Airlines flight also on its way to Honolulu had a similar instance only a couple of years ago, blew the cowling, the outer shell of that engine, off in a very similar incident. So this is something that the probe is just beginning, and there is a bit of a precedent here. And there needs to be a probe to see what actually happened with this engine and why it failed in such a big way.
HILL: Pete, real quickly, the fact that there has been a significant reduction in travel in this country over the past year or so because of the pandemic, if this plane had sat idle, much like a car that you need to start from time to time if you're not using it, is there any chance that could play a role?
MUNTEAN: It could have played a role, but I've looked into this a little bit, Erica. And according to Flight Aware, last six months, actually last eight months, this plane has flown about 300 times so it was in regular use.
[16:05:07]
It is a concern, though, according to the FAA, because it actually instituted a bulletin to operators of the Boeing 737 after that plane sat idle for a while, depending on the airline, and a valve inside one of the engines, a check air valve that supplied hot air to the plane's critical anti-icing system, could have been problematic and stopped functioning because of lack of use in the pandemic.
So this is something that aviation investigators and aviation experts have looked into a little bit. Does not seem to be the incident -- the case in this incident, but it is something that the airlines and the FAA and the NTSB is aware of.
HILL: Yes, and that investigation, as you both pointed out, is underway.
Pete Muntean, Omar Jimenez, thank you both.
Also joining us now, Jim Hall, who was chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board for seven years.
Jim, good to have you with us. You actually called this another example of cracks in aviation safety. Why?
JIM HALL, FORMER NTSB CHAIRMAN: Well, in the last decade, the FAA has been a very sluggish regulator and a lot of the regulatory responsibilities have been transferred from the FAA to the industry. I think we saw that in the 737 MAX investigations that was conducted by Congress and the inspector general and others.
And I am hopeful that the new secretary will put a commission in place to address what I think is a failure on the part of the FAA to provide the type of safety oversight that we as taxpayers and people who pay the airline taxes pay for.
HILL: I want to follow-up. You just mentioned the 737 MAX and what we learned in the investigation there, after the plane was grounded for nearly two years following two fatal crashes, that House Transportation Committee report in it blasted, blasted Boeing. Also the FAA, writing, "The facts documented a disturbing pattern of technical miscalculation and troubling mismanagement judgments made by Boeing. It also illuminates numerous oversight lapses and accountability gaps by the FAA that played a significant role in the 737 MAX crashes."
Now I have to point out that following that report, the FAA said it looked forward to working with the committee to implement improvements that had been identified. Boeing said it had incorporated feedback from the investigations and also reviews, and it had learned many hard lessons as a company from those accidents.
What have you seen, though, in terms of the moves that were promised by both the FAA and Boeing? Have they been put into place? Have there been some improvement since those tragedies?
HALL: Oh, I think not. I think that that's why I'm suggesting that the new secretary give the FAA a kick in the pants with an independent commission to look at its responsibilities. As you know, during those hearings, the FAA in many cases said they didn't have the technical ability to provide the oversight.
Well, we need to look at the manning at the FAA, the type of qualifications, and be sure the American people have individuals, inspectors in place that can be sure that the certification process is what it is. It's a certification process to guarantee the safety of flight.
HILL: When we look at what happened with this particular flight, some of that video, the video that was taken of the engine on fire as this plane is still flying, missing its casings there -- apologies if that's not the correct term, but missing these parts. How helpful is that for investigators as they try to determine exactly what happened?
HALL: Well, I think it will be helpful, but it was certainly chilling. I've been in this area with the NTSB for several decades, and I guess that's the most chilling piece of video I've ever seen in aviation safety issue.
HILL: That's really saying something.
HALL: Well, I'm sure you looked at the video. It gave me chills and so I think all Americans -- what we need to look at, Erica, is we're going to have more and more things in the sky. You know, we're all familiar with satellites and the number of satellites that are up there.
But we're going to have -- with drones and increased aviation and increased types of rotorcraft, we're going to have lots of aviation so people on the ground need to be concerned about what's in the air above them and who is responsible for the safety, and that's the Federal Aviation Administration.
HILL: Well, to that point, in terms of -- I mean, it is again -- it is remarkable on two fronts that this plane, that they were able to turn around and land it safely, that there were no injuries on board, and also that there were no injuries on the ground.
[16:10:13]
When we see these giant pieces of that plane, in addition to the videos, of them falling from the sky, I mean, to me it also raises the question, you talk about how chilling it is to see that engine from inside the plane as it's still -- as it's still moving. The fact that these pieces would fall off in this way.
It's one thing to hear about an engine failure, but it seems that when we hear the engine failed and then it literally started splitting into pieces falling to the ground, that seems -- I mean, obviously this is your area of expertise. I don't remember ever hearing of something like that, that the parts are literally just flying off.
HALL: Well, this is, I think, the most dramatic case. But in the -- since 2016, go to your point about the use of this aircraft, there have been eight similar incidents that have occurred in the United States and there are recommendations that were made by the NTSB in 2017 to the FAA that still remain open today. So as I say, FAA has been a sluggish regulator.
We need a regulator that's going to be on top of the changing dynamics and technology because these were -- a lot of this is new large engines with more thrust, able to carry more people and smaller -- two engines rather than three or four. So area of safety in this regard is only going to increase as we see aviation return to full capacity in the United States.
HILL: So, to that point, how concerned should someone be about getting on a plane? Because overall, you know, we talk about this all the time, but overall it's safer to fly in many cases if we're looking at statistics than it is to get in a car.
HALL: Well, it's very safe but let's face it, as taxpayers and people that pay the airline tax, we're paying for that safety. And we need -- when there are cracks in the system and they're not being addressed, Congress, our representatives, the secretary of Transportation, have an obligation to protect the American people.
HILL: Jim Hall, really appreciate you joining us this afternoon. Thank you for your insight and for your expertise. Appreciate it.
HALL: Thank you, Erica.
HILL: Well, the severe winter weather may be gone in Texas, but the crisis there is far from over. We are going to take you live to the Lone Star State where residents are once again lining up for water.
You're live in the CNN NEWSROOM.
[16:16:53]
HILL: In Texas, temperatures are on the rise. In that area things are improving, but overall the state remains very much in the middle of a crisis. Many Texans look at this waiting in long lines just to get drinking water.
CNN's Natasha Chen is in Houston. She's at a bottled water distribution event.
Natasha, the city there, as I understand it, just lifting the boil water advisory. What more do we know about that? I mean, that's a fairly significant step.
NATASHA CHEN, CNN NATIONAL CORRESPONDENT: Yes, Erica, there are improvements happening all the time. But you still see so many -- we've been seeing cars coming through past us nonstop since early this afternoon. There is still going to be a need for bottled water.
And I can show you this push alert that I actually got on my phone. It's saying that effective immediately, Houston's main water system has lifted its boil water notice and asking people to flush their water system by running cold water faucets for at least a minute. Making and discarding several batches of ice and running water softeners through a regeneration cycle.
Now I spoke to the Houston mayor who has been here volunteering. He says that more than two million bottles of water have been given out across the city in the last couple of days. But he also talked to me about the key in this still being a necessity even after the boil water notice has been lifted.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
MAYOR SYLVESTER TURNER (D), HOUSTON: We're starting to turn the corner a little bit. But the reality is, as you can see, there are a lot of people that are in need of water and I was thinking just this morning, even once the boil water notice is lifted, because people have -- there are so many busted pipes, they will still need water, you know, until they get their homes repaired.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
CHEN: More than 14 million Texans are experiencing water service disruption. So a lot of people don't have running water and the people in Houston here, we know a thousand -- several thousands have called into the city's hotline reporting busted pipes. And one of the problems right now is that there is a shortage of plumbers. There is a shortage of supplies to make those repairs.
So fixing those busted pipes could take quite some time and that's how, you know, we learned the one experience of homeowners we met yesterday, they've been hauling water from their neighbor's house four or five times a day just to flush toilets and to wash dishes. And given the state of -- you know, the shortage of plumbers that could be the case for quite some time, Erica.
HILL: Yes. It makes you appreciate good neighbors more than ever. Boy, still a very tough situation there.
Natasha Chen, thank you so much.
Up next, a big week on Capitol Hill as President Biden's pick for attorney general prepares to face senators at his confirmation hearing. You'll hear what Merrick Garland is expected to say in his opening statement next.
You're live in the CNN NEWSROOM.
[16:24:11]
HILL: In less than 24 hours, Merrick Garland will begin his confirmation hearings. Of course, he was denied that opportunity when he was nominated for Supreme Court justice. So nearly five years later, he'll get that opportunity as part of his nomination for U.S. attorney general under President Joe Biden.
His opening statement, in it, in his opening statement, Garland plans to talk about where he sees this position going, and also will touch a little bit on the country.
CNN's Suzanne Malveaux was live for us on Capitol hill. She has more of that statement which was released.
Suzanne, what can we expect?
SUZANNE MALVEAUX, CNN NATIONAL CORRESPONDENT: Erica, we know that the judge is known for his fair, his evenhandedness, and he really goes into this hearing with a great deal of bipartisan support. It is very likely and expected that he will be confirmed as attorney general, but not first without some tough questions coming his way.
[16:25:01]
It is not surprising that in his opening statements he talks about the importance of the independence of the Justice Department, the integrity of the Justice Department. And especially during this time of racial reckoning, if you will, he hearkens back and puts it into historical context saying one of the first jobs of the Justice Department and the attorney general was to protect the voting rights of African-Americans from the Klan that was essentially threatening them with violence.
And so he'll talk about this and he'll say, "150 years after the department's founding, badly extremist attacks on our democratic institutions also remain central to its mission. If confirmed, I will supervised the prosecution of white supremacists and others who stormed the Capitol on January 6, a heinous attack that sought to disrupt a cornerstone of our democracy, the peaceful transition -- transfer of power to a newly elected government."
Erica, also the big question Democrats and Republicans will want to know is what does he do when it comes to the former President Trump. Does he move forward with an investigation, and perhaps even pressing criminal charges against Trump as McConnell had suggested that that was the proper venue to do so.
The other side as well, Republicans will want to ask him about some of those hot button issues. The investigations regarding Democrats, the New York Governor Cuomo and his role in terms of reporting the deaths, the COVID deaths out of nursing homes. And then also the president's son Hunter Biden. What was his role in terms of tax issues or alleged money laundering? These are the kinds of things that Republicans are going to be asking of him.
Democrats looking to see someone who is impartial and that will depoliticize the Justice Department that we had seen in the last four years, Erica.
HILL: We'll be watching for all of that. Before I let you go, Suzanne, where do we stand in terms of the status of this now long-awaited COVID relief bill?
MALVEAUX: COVID relief is going to happen. Tomorrow we're going to actually see the House Budget Committee take it up, mark it up. It's a huge, massive COVID relief bill. It will then kick forward to the full House for a vote. Potentially by the end of the week it will go back and forth, House and Senate. But look for the date March 14th. That's the hope that they get it to the president's desk before those employment benefits that millions of Americans are depending on expire -- Erica.
HILL: Suzanne Malveaux, with the latest for us. Suzanne, thank you.
Let's dig in a little deeper. Joining me now former adviser to four presidents and CNN senior political analyst David Gergen is with us, along with staff writer with the "New Yorker" and CNN global affairs analyst, Susan Glasser.
Good to see both of you. David, as we look at this, and we just learned from Suzanne, in terms of what is expected in Merrick Garland's opening statement, you know, he talks about his experience with the Oklahoma City bombing. The fact, too, that he has said that he will supervise the prosecution of white supremacists.
The fact that he is simply acknowledging white supremacy is a big departure, also talking about the fact that there is not equal justice in this country, another big departure from what we've just seen under Attorney General Bill Barr.
DAVID GERGEN, CNN SENIOR POLITICAL ANALYST: It's a very significant set of steps back to normality in the Justice Department. And just as we've seen with President Biden, he stayed above the fray on the trial, the impeachment trial here in the last couple of weeks. I think he very intentionally did not want to be seen as part of the decision- making process. And now he's doing the same thing with Garland and the Justice Department.
He's saying essentially this is the nation's Justice Department, it's not my Justice Department. And I think he's very anxious especially on these racial issues when there is so much distrust in minority communities about how the government has handled these issues, how the police have been handled.
It's extremely important to have someone like Garland. I think they're fortunate to have him despite the lingering anger in the Democratic Party about the way Garland was in effect denied a seat. And Democrats continue to believe that the Republicans stole the seat from them and they're still very angry about that.
HILL: They are, which is why there is a lot being made, Susan, of the fact -- this photo alone, right, that we will see, these pictures that we will see of Merrick Garland in that nomination hearing sitting there. That's an important moment in and of itself.
SUSAN GLASSER, CNN GLOBAL AFFAIRS ANALYST: Well, I do think it's very politically resonant. Certainly tomorrow in Washington that's what people will be thinking of. You know, that this is a hearing that came many years after the fact for Merrick Garland who, of course, was President Obama's choice to serve on the Supreme Court and in many ways I think it was a precursor of the bare-knuckle politics of the Trump era.
And I think for many Democrats it remains a symbol of the lengths to which Mitch McConnell, then the Senate majority leader now the minority leader, was willing to go to basically say white makes right in Washington.
[16:30:00]
And I think there's a lot of people who view that as the prerequisite for some of the norm (ph) shattering of the Trump years, right. Donald Trump, without Mitch McConnell, would have just been a guy shouting at the T.V.
And so, I think the Merrick Garland case has assumed, really, an enormous importance in the recent history of our politics.
HILL: You know, I want to get your take, too, in what we saw, in terms of foreign affairs. President Biden, excuse me, announcing this week, America is back, saying that allies could trust America again, after four years of the last administration. And, Susan, just the fact that Biden would say that is remarkable. An American President telling our allies, you can trust us.
So, what does that tell you -- what does he have to do, I would say, actually, to prove that? What do we need to see?
GLASSER: Well, that's right. I think, in some ways, right, the, sort of, good words are that -- are the easy part here. You know, just as -- when Obama came in after unpopular George W. Bush in Europe, same thing with Joe Biden. And especially our European allies, very strained relations with Donald Trump. The America first president withdrew from multilateral accords. He disdained allies and seemed to relish dealing with adversaries.
So, in that sense, Biden has done all of the things you might expect to say, very quickly out of the gates, no, this is a return to a much more normal, both Republican or Democratic, foreign policy. The challenge is that it's not going to be that easy for people to believe. Well, why should I make a deal with the United States if there's just going to be a change in two years or in four years in our foreign policy again?
So, for example, Biden has said he wants to rejoin the Iran nuclear deal. Right now, there is a lot of dancing around with the Iranians on just who needs to take the first step there. But there's a serious question as to how much anyone wants to risk a deal with the United States right now.
HILL: You know, David, to that point, I mean, how much -- how concerning, to allies, is the uncertainty in the United States? Not only what we've seen over the last four years, but, really, just even what we're seeing over here on the ground play out, I mean in terms of domestic issues. Look at Texas.
DAVID GERGEN, CNN POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: We've lost so much ground as a nation. Susan was really underscoring that, in terms of the trust in America's leadership. The faith that we're a reliable partner. And I think that it's one of the most important things on Biden's agenda.
And, notably, Erica, he didn't say, you can trust us. He said, I'm -- I want to earn your trust. He knows that we -- that we're in the hole on this. And he's -- so, he's moved smartly, you know, going back into Paris which was really important on the environmental front. Rejoining the World Health Organization. Very important on the pandemic front. You know, saying we want to restart talks with Iran. Very important international relations. And we've -- he's also agreed to a five-year extension with a nuclear agreement with the Russians. So, all of that is positive.
But the world has changed since he was vice president. For one thing, we went backwards with Trump, in terms of our relationship with our allies. But very, very importantly, you know, China has become a much more player -- important player in Europe than it was when it -- when Joe Biden was vice president.
The goods trading in Eur -- in the E.U. is now bigger with China than it is with the United States. That's a big, big change. So, what you've got -- what we've got now is even though -- even as Joe Biden reaches out his hand, Macron, the leader of the French, is arguing for what he calls strategic autonomy. He wants to have Europe, especially France, much -- rely much more on itself than on the United States as a partner.
Similarly, Merkel, Chancellor Merkel, who is getting ready to step down. But she's made it clear, on a couple of occasions, including this past week, that Germany wants to broaden and its relationships. And Germany is looking to the Pacific as -- more, too.
So, this is not going to be a quick switch off thing -- switch a light back on. It's going to require a lot of work over time. And Susan is -- really points to something important about whether the president can deliver for the long term. Joe Biden speaks the -- for Joe Biden. But can -- does he speak for the United States, when he makes agreements? And I think that is very much in question right now. HILL: Before we let you go, we've seen a number of examples this week of a crisis in leadership, here at home, whether it's in Texas, in California. Right here in New York State, there are some real questions about accountability.
David, how much do you think partisanship has, perhaps, led to what feels like a lack of accountability at multiple levels, which has allowed many leaders to escape responsibility?
GERGEN: Well, it's -- I think -- there's -- certainly, ideology has played a role in this. Texas has prided itself of being very individualistic and not relying on the U.S. government, keeping the U.S. government the hell out of Texas.
[16:35:02]
GERGEN: And, yet, it turns out they weren't well prepared for this set of events. They -- you know, there were signs that this was going to happen. Other states had prepared themselves. Texas, relying on this -- its ideology, refused to invest the kind of money that would have prevented and headed off this before it ever occurred. And I think that's true, as you look into other states as well.
HILL: Susan Glasser, David Gergen, always good to have you both with us.
GERGEN: Thank you, Erica.
HILL: The U.S. is closing in on half a million COVID-19 deaths. This, as Dr. Fauci says masks, likely here, for some time to come. We'll discuss the latest on COVID next. You're live in the CNN NEWSROOM.
HILL: The U.S. approaching half a million COVID-19-related deaths. It is a sobering prospect. All of this as so many are wondering just when the country could return to some kind of normalcy, some kind of post- pandemic normalcy.
[16:40:06]
HILL: Dr. Anthony Fauci, this morning, telling my colleague, Dana Bash, that it's possible Americans will still be wearing masks in 2022 to protect against the virus.
Let's discuss this and more with CNN Medical Analyst Dr. Jonathan Reiner, professor of medicine and surgery at George Washington University; and Dr. William Schaffner, a professor at Vanderbilt University Medical Center's divisious -- Division, rather, of Infectious Diseases. It's great to see both of you.
You know, Dr. Schaffner, as we look at this, you know, nearly half a million deaths, it is a terrible benchmark. That said, the overall numbers are definitely showing signs of improvement. New cases, hospitalizations, even daily-reported deaths dropping. So, is it your sense, Dr. Schaffner, this is the end of maybe that post-holiday surge we've talked so much about or are we actually getting a handle on things?
DR. WILLIAM SCHAFFNER, PROFESSOR, DIVISION OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES, VANDERBILT UNIVERSITY MEDICAL CENTER: Actually, Erica, I think we are starting to get a handle on things. This is probably a combination of a number of things. The surge is diminishing.
But, also, more and more people have been infected with this virus, even without symptoms or very mild symptoms. So, we may be developing some degree of herd immunity. And then, of course, we are starting to vaccinate and that's making a contribution. So, perhaps, all of those things together. We're at the beginning of the end, I hope, or getting close to it.
HILL: As we look at what is coming down the pike, right, more and more people -- we know the demand is there for the vaccine, in many cases. The supply has not quite kept up. Teachers are still a major focus, which Dr. Fauci touched on this morning. Here's what he had to say.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
DR. ANTHONY FAUCI, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF ALLERGY AND INFECTIOUS DISEASES: One of the things that comes up is that we'll be doing more and more of -- and I think these are things that are important to put into the mix of the consideration. Is that teachers, clearly, should be prioritized among those essential personnel to get vaccinated. I don't believe that it should be a sine qua non. That if they're not vaccinated, they should not go back. I believe we should prioritize them and get as many vaccinated as we possibly can.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
HILL: Dr. Reiner, you and I have talked about teacher vaccinations.
DR. JONATHAN REINER, CNN MEDICAL ANALYST: Yes.
HILL: Do you agree with Dr. Fauci that they should absolutely be prioritized, but they don't have to, necessarily, all be vaccinated to be back in the building?
REINER: Yes. Hi, Erica. Look, I think there's a difference between prioritizing teachers and proactively vaccinating teachers. So, I was vaccinated on the second day that vaccines were available in the United States. Because -- not just because I was prioritized, but because we were proactively vaccinating health care workers.
So, if we want our -- to protect our teachers and we want to get schools open this calendar year, let's just not prioritize them and then throw them into the -- you know, the whole situation of having to find open slots. Let's proactively vaccinate them.
And I think the ideal solution is to dedicate the first four million doses of the Johnson & Johnson vaccine, which will likely be approved at the end of next week, and proactively take those single-shot vaccines and give it to every teacher who wants it.
HILL: What do you think the reality is of that happening? REINER: I mean, I think it can happen. I think we need to have the political will to do that. If we want to open schools, we have to face the facts that all of the reassuring data that states that transmission in schools is low, was acquired in environment without variants.
And if we're worried about variants and the increased transmissibility of the variants, then let's maximally protect the teachers. And the way to do that is to vaccinate them, understanding that children won't be able to be vaccinated until the fall. So, let's vaccinate the teachers now.
HILL: So, in terms of children, you know, this has come up more and more, that they won't -- we don't know enough, right. The vaccine isn't even available to kids yet. There are some trials underway involving children, Dr. Schaffner. But the fact that children will not be vaccinated, likely even by the fall, should that be a concern for parents and for staff in schools, or, no, because of the way kids transmit the virus?
SCHAFFNER: Well, it's one thing to -- Erica, to tell people that children, particularly younger children, are not big transmitters. It's quite another thing to relieve everyone's anxiety. And I'm with Dr. Reiner. I think all adults, actually beyond the teachers, who have anything to do with our -- with school children, ought to be vaccinated as quickly as possible. The teachers, the administrators, the custodians, the people who work in food service, the school bus drivers. Let's vaccinate them all.
And then, when vaccine does become available for children, I would think, toward the end of the summer I would hope, let's start vaccinating them, too.
[16:45:02]
SCHAFFNER: But, in the meantime, we will hit the anxiety that's out there among all the teachers and the parents as well as reducing actual transmission.
HILL: You know, you mentioned the variants, Dr. Reiner. In New York today, New York State reporting the first case of the variant first detected in South Africa. How concerned are you about these different areas? I mean, the reality is we're not doing enough sequencing, right.
And we haven't from the beginning, as we've been told here in the United States. So, there are likely -- there's likely more than one case of this variant in New York State. How concerned should we be, at this point, as they're spreading more easily?
REINER: Well, you know, the truth is that even though the United States haven't had as many apparent cases of these variants, they have been here, almost certainly, for months. But if you look around the world, where these particular variants are endemic, like the United Kingdom and South Africa, they are seeing the same dramatic declines in cases as we are seeing in the United States. And those are in places enriched with these variants.
So, I'm not convinced that the U.S. is destined to see another surge from these variants. Because all of the mitigation strategies, which appear to be working. And, as Dr. Schaffner said, the fact that so many people in this country have probably been asymptomatically exposed to this virus, we started to see the outer reaches, perhaps, of some, you know, community or herd immunity. I'm not sure we're going to see or we're destined to see a surge from these variants.
So, we need to watch these. We need to surveil for these variants. We need to do more genomic sequencing. But I think it's not a destiny that we're -- we will certainly face, necessarily.
HILL: I will happily take that assessment. Drs. Jonathan Reiner and William Schaffner, always good to have you both with us. Thank you so much.
REINER: Thank you.
SCHAFFNER: Thank you, Erica.
HILL: Just ahead, a wealthy GOP donor gave more than $2 million for voter fraud investigations. Well, now, he says he wants his money back. That's next. You're live in the CNN NEWSROOM.
[16:47:18]
HILL: Believing conspiracy theories about voter fraud can be a pretty expensive mistake. According to "The Washington Post," a wealthy man from North Carolina wanted former President Trump to win the election so badly he actually forked over $2 million to a group that promised to reveal all sorts of fraud. Well, now he wants his money back. Here's CNN's Randi Kaye.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
JOHN KING, CNN CHIEF NATIONAL CORRESPONDENT: Joe Biden is on a trajectory to pass the president, as soon as more votes come in.
RANDI KAYE, CNN CORRESPONDENT (voice-over): As victory appeared to be slipping away from Donald Trump post-Election Day, a wealthy conservative donor from North Carolina devised a plan to find out if the election was legitimate. So, Fred Eshelman reached out to Texas- based True the Vote, which promises on its Web site to protect election integrity. After a brief 20-minute phone call on November 5th, Eshelman decided to donate. According to court documents, Eshelman said by phone, I'm in for 2, as in $2 million.
In the hours after Eshelman's millions were wired to True the Vote, Catherine Engelbrecht, the group's founder, issued a press release promising significant tangible evidence that numerous illegal ballots have been cast and counted in the 2020 general election. And announced a fund, in excess of $1 million, to incentivize whistleblowers as Mr. Eshelman had wanted. (on camera): But as time went on, after Eshelman donated yet another $500,000, he was hardly impressed with the group's progress. He's now suing True the Vote and demanding his money back, saying, in the lawsuit, that money was donated conditionally, based on promises made by True the Vote that it would investigate, litigate, and expose suspected illegal balloting and fraud.
(voice-over): In a statement, Eshelman told us, quote, "True the Vote failed, in every way, to make use of my directed donation to investigate and either prove or disprove election fraud, as agreed upon, and failed to respond to my requests for information about how the funds were spent."
But James Bopp, the lawyer representing True the Vote, tells me that Eshelman is playing the innocent babe in the woods. Adding, there is nothing in all the emails, text messages and documents that shows he ever suggested he made this a conditional gift.
In True the Vote's response to the lawsuit filed in court, the group also says there was no discussion that Eshelman could claim his gift back. Still, Eshelman claims in his lawsuit that by November 13th, Bopp, the group's attorney, had only filed cookie-cutter lawsuits, making vague allegations of fraud, unsupported by any evidence in four states.
CATHERINE ENGELBRECHT, FOUNDER, TRUE THE VOTE: We're doing a variety of things in Georgia. But our focus, at the moment, is a preemptive challenge of just over 364,000 voters who appear to be ineligible.
KAYE: Meanwhile, less than a week after suing Georgia, Michigan, Wisconsin and Pennsylvania, accusing the states which Biden won of counting illegal votes, True the Vote dropped its lawsuits. Court records show by November 17th, Eshelman emailed the group's founder, asking for an accounting of all the money spent and a refund of what was left. When he says the group didn't comply, Eshelman's lawyer sent a final letter on November 23rd, demanding the return of $2 million.
[16:55:05]
KAYE: Eshelman hasn't received a penny of his money back. And that tangible evidence the group promised existed that could prove voter fraud, that has never come to light either.
Randi Kaye, CNN, Palm Beach County, Florida.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
HILL: Tonight, Stanley Tucci is traveling to city of togas and gladiators, in search of some perfect pasta and pretty much everything else that's amazing in Italy. It's your chance to experience Rome like never before. Tune in tonight for the new CNN original series, "Stanley Tucci: Searching for Italy," 9:00 Eastern, right here on CNN.
Still to come, we are turning back to our top story. The airliner disaster that almost was. Brand new images just into CNN, that and much more. Stay with us. You're live in the CNN NEWSROOM. [17:56:00]
Load-Date: February 21, 2021



End of Document


REP. LIZZIE FLETCHER (D-TX) IS INTERVIEWED ON CNN "NEWSROOM"
CQ Transcriptions
February 21, 2021 Sunday

Copyright  2021 CQ-Roll Call, Inc.	All Rights Reserved
All materials herein are protected by United States copyright law and may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, displayed, published or broadcast without the prior written permission of CQ Transcriptions. You may not alter or remove any trademark, copyright or other notice from copies of the content.
Body




EVENT DATE: February 21, 2021
TYPE: NEWS EVENT
SPEAKER: REP. LIZZIE FLETCHER (D-TX)
FREDRICKA WHITFIELD, CNN HOST:  All right, with me now to talk more about the crisis that continues to play out there in Texas is Congresswoman Lizzie Fletcher. She is a Democratic Representative from Texas.   
      Congresswoman, it is good to see you.   
REP. LIZZIE FLETCHER (D-TX):  Thank you for having me. I'm so glad to hear your focus on what's happening here in Texas. Thanks for including me today.   
WHITFIELD:  Absolutely. And so what's happening where you are? How are you doing? How's your family? How about at your home? Water? Power? Well, I see lights on and you're with us via computer, but if you're at home, how are things?   
FLETCHER:  That's right. Well, thank you. My family is doing fine, all things considered. We, like so many people across our city have had some busted pipes, we were out of power for a little over 48 hours here, some of my family members longer.   
      And everything we just heard Mayor Turner describing I think is right across our community, but we feel fortunate that we had a little bit of notice. On Monday, my parents' power went out first. So I had time to fill up my bathtubs.   
      And we are still under that boil water notice here in Houston and throughout much of my district, although we do have some of the jurisdictions in my congressional district as well where that boil water notice has been lifted.   
      And so, there is hope. We are slowly emerging from the power crisis. But this water crisis is very real. And I, like the Mayor, Mayor Turner is my Mayor, and like him, I've been handing out bottled water, working with our City Council members, with Harris County Commissioners to make sure that people across our community get bottled water, drinking water, and also water for other uses, and there's just such a great need right now across our community and across the entire State of Texas.   
WHITFIELD:  So clearly, you knew what to do with, you know, putting water in your bathtubs. You were born and raised in Texas. But you know, beyond the energy stuff, which we will talk about in a minute, what do you believe happened here?   
      Do you feel like as a whole, Texans were caught off guard, you know, not ready for this kind of weather?   
FLETCHER:  Yes, it's a great question. And I think there was a cascading series of failures here. As one person I talked to recently put it, you know, this was like a hurricane out in the Gulf, and in fact, that's how I responded to it.   
      I have a bag ready for hurricanes that has a weather radio and lamps in it and emergency candles. I didn't need the off this time, but you know, I went and got my bag and filled up my bathtubs, but really, we didn't have the kind of notice we have for a hurricane even though ERCOT was looking a week before the events at a real power loss.   
      And so I think there was a huge communication failure to those of us who had our power shut off, as well as real risks to the grid. And so we have seen that this catastrophic power failure was magnified by a failure to communicate with customers by an inability to roll those blackouts so that some people have been without power for 72 hours or longer.   
      It's one thing to roll your power off for four or five hours at a time, and I think we could have made adjustments if there have been better communication.   
      But really, we have to reevaluate our entire system here and see what failed. I think there are failures at every level, but especially failure of government and paying attention to the information we have had for years about what we need to do to protect not just our grid, but to protect our neighbors and our citizens of the state of Texas.   
WHITFIELD:  And how will you go about reevaluating? You serve in the House Energy and Commerce Committee, Texas State leaders have not pushed utilities to winterize the grid, the power lines, the power plants you know in the past. You're calling for an investigation into ERCOT for starters, which runs, you know much of the Texas grid, but what can Congress do in this reevaluation?   
FLETCHER:  Well, that's right. The Energy and Commerce Committee has called for a full investigation, and my colleague Marc Veasey from Fort Worth, and I serve on that committee and are very grateful for the quick and early support of our Chairman and Subcommittee Chairman on getting an investigation rolling, calling on the F.E.R.C. to work with us as well.   
      Now, the F.E.R.C. evaluated a failure in Texas 10 years ago, and had several recommendations, including winterization of our equipment. And what we've seen is the way the Texas system is designed, we don't have incentives for power providers to do that winterization, there are not financial incentives.   
      And the other thing is in this market-based system, we don't really have excess capacity, and that's to bring costs down, but we've seen the cost over the last week in lives. We've seen the incredible devastation and disruption from this loss of power across our state.   
      And so, we really need to reevaluate both winterization as well as capacity issues and we need to look at oversight and regulation.   
      Ultimately, the Governor of Texas, the State Legislature oversee not just ERCOT, but the Public Utility Commission. We need to make sure that there are enforceable standards, and I think that what our committee can do on Energy and Commerce is talk about the best practices.   
      But also, we need to look and see what all of these systemic failures are. And here in Texas, I think people are willing to reevaluate how it is that we do things to make sure that our number one priority is met, which is keeping people safe.   
      And I always say, keeping people safe is the first responsibility of government and our government in Texas failed us this week.   
WHITFIELD:  One of your constituents is Senator Ted Cruz, and you've said in response to his Cancun trip this week that leadership matters. Is his apology enough?   
FLETCHER:  Well, I really haven't focused on Senator Cruz this week because what I'm seeing is leadership across our community.   
      I know that my colleagues in Congress are out doing what I'm doing. I know that our -- I mean, we just saw Mayor Turner, who has been such a champion this week. Our County Judge, Lina Hidalgo, and mayors, City Council members, County Commissioners, the leadership structure here locally, really has been superb, under very difficult, challenging times.   
      And I should also add that in a time where our state government has really made it difficult for local governments, you know, there are sort of a lot of responsibility and yet, an attempt to take away authority.   
      And so there are some real structural problems that we need to focus on here in Texas, when it comes to how our government can work together, and it's something I think we do well, we did it well in August, when we had Hurricane Laura bearing down on us. I saw Federal, State and local government working together very well.   
      We haven't seen that, as well, before this crisis, I hope we will continue to see it after this crisis. And I'm working with our Division of Emergency Management, which is working with F.E.M.A.   
      Now, there is a way to help not only during the disaster, but in this recovery, and that's what I hope and expect to see from our leaders at every level.   
      And I'm really proud of our leaders here in Houston and Harris County who have worked so hard to get our community back on its feet.   
WHITFIELD:  When we hear from some Texans who say they want to hear from senior leadership, they are talking about members of Congress and the U.S. Senate. And you know, you're with us right now. We've seen other Members of Congress who have been on the ground, helping to distribute aid.   
      But then there have been some that we haven't heard or seen much of including Senator John Cornyn. Have you heard much about his whereabouts? His commitment? And where he is?   
FLETCHER:  You know, I haven't been in touch with Senator Cornyn directly, either. I have been in touch with other Members of Congress. We have had calls with ERCOT this week.   
      We've had calls with the Texas Division of Emergency Management every morning, and I hear my colleagues asking questions on those calls as I am. So I know that many members of our congressional delegation are very engaged in responding with their communities.   
      And of course, there are so many things the Federal government can do in moments like this. And one of the critical pieces is distributing aid.   
      And I led my colleagues on Thursday in urging President Biden to sign the major disaster declaration as quickly as possible which he now have done.   
WHITFIELD:  And he will be visiting Texas this week. Yes, and he is visiting Texas this week. Do you think it's particularly important for the President to see firsthand where the need is and to show his face and make --   
FLETCHER:  I do think so, and I think he has been very respectful in saying he wants to come at the appropriate time when it's not a burden on the recovery efforts, and so I appreciate.   
      I think many of us over the last week when we had no power and no sense of when it was going to be restored. And now of course, there's the water crisis. It's important to know that people are seeing that; that the President of United States understands the devastation here and is doing everything he can to help.   
      So I'm glad to see the response from President Biden. He has been on top of this since before the weather hit, signing that initial disaster declaration.   
      And I think it's really important for us here in Texas to see that and to see it from all of our elected leaders.   
WHITFIELD:  All right, Congresswoman Lizzie Fletcher, thank you so much for your time. Appreciate it and all the best.   
FLETCHER:  Thanks so much.  
      END   
Load-Date: February 22, 2021



End of Document


MAYOR RON NIRENBERG (I), SAN ANTONIO, TX IS INTERVIEWED ON CNN "NEWSROOM"
CQ Transcriptions
February 21, 2021 Sunday

Copyright  2021 CQ-Roll Call, Inc.	All Rights Reserved
All materials herein are protected by United States copyright law and may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, displayed, published or broadcast without the prior written permission of CQ Transcriptions. You may not alter or remove any trademark, copyright or other notice from copies of the content.
Body




EVENT DATE: February 21, 2021
TYPE: NEWS EVENT
SPEAKER: MAYOR RON NIRENBERG (I), SAN ANTONIO, TX
FREDRICKA WHITFIELD, CNN HOST:  All right. So for more now on the crisis in Texas, let's talk to Ron Nirenberg. He is the mayor of San Antonio, the second biggest city in the state.   
      Mayor, good to see you.  
MAYOR RON NIRENBERG (I), SAN ANTONIO, TEXAS:  You too, Fredricka.  
WHITFIELD:  So give me an update now on the power and the water situation in your city.   
NIRENBERG:  Sure. Well, the sun and the weather have improved things here in San Antonio. And as you've seen our systems are starting to come back online. Virtually all of our service area with power is now on and we are starting to see some of the boil water notices lifted in San Antonio.  
      In fact, less than 10 percent of our service area was no longer getting service from water as of yesterday. So we do hope to see that improved over the hours to come.  
      The real challenge now though is as the sun comes out, we're revealing the damage and the suffering that's occurred. And so we've been out all day the last several days at distribution sites where people made clean potable water. They also need food because a lot of that is spoiled with power outages.  
      There's been, you know, a run on supplies. We're seeing a lot of the materials at plumbing stores and hardware stores, you know, begin to run out. And a lot of people still don't have water because they're in facilities whose power tripped pumps.  
      So there's still quite a lot of suffering, and we're dealing with all that right now.   
WHITFIELD:  So yesterday we talked with the mayor of Manor, Texas. I know that's about 80 miles, 100 miles outside of your city. And he expressed frustration with the lack of communication from county and state leaders and beyond during the crisis.  
      Take a listen.   
      (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)  
MAYOR LARRY WALLACE, MANOR, TEXAS:  Honestly, I have lost all faith in senior leadership. I have only heard from council members and fellow mayors that I've built relationships with around here, my county commissioner and our brand new county judge. Everybody else is a lost hope. I'm just going to be frank with it and that's how everybody feels.  
      (END VIDEO CLIP)  
WHITFIELD:  So Mr. Mayor, have you had any better luck with communication with senior leadership? And if so, has it been helpful?   
NIRENBERG:  You know, it's been a challenge. The blackout was virtually a blackout on communications as well at the start of this, you know. But as things have started to thaw out, we are starting to get more communication and assistance from state leaders as well as federal leaders to bring relief to us.  
      The challenge though is when all this occurred, again, we weren't given any notice. We were planning on an ice event which typically freezes roadways. We were out there preparing infrastructure.  
      But when this hit in the middle of the night, it went from normal condition to critical condition and rolling blackouts with no notice. So there was very little opportunity for us to prepare our communities, and there was certainly no anticipation that those so-called rolling blackouts would basically leave folks freezing in their homes for almost a week.   
WHITFIELD:  It caught everybody by surprise, clearly. The mayor of Manor also, you know, expressed frustration with the local water company. The company did hear him in my interview yesterday and now says a key supply line broke and hopes to have it repaired today and bottled water will soon be delivered.  
      How about for you? I know you mentioned that there are were still a few water obstacles in your city. Is the water company coming to your aid? What's happening?   
NIRENBERG:  We are. So we have had central distribution points for volume water straight from the water utility for a couple days now. We've also had about 15 different locations for bottled water being distributed all around town. So that has been -- that has been good. There's been a lot of cooperation there.  
      We've also seen an incredible outpouring of support from our San Antonio Food Bank and volunteers, giving folks the essentials that they need.  
      The real challenge now is going to be in terms of fixing infrastructure, so we're seeing relief from the state and the Fed with regard to making funds reimbursable. We're also working locally with our public sector and private philanthropy to make sure that people don't have to wait to begin repairs.  
      We're cutting red tape so that we can ensure that repairs get underway quickly because as the weather has subsided, we're now starting to anticipate what will be a catastrophic crisis with regard to breakage in lines, piping in people's homes, things like that and the last people to bear more of this burden are the people who have been suffering in our communities for the last week through this weather event.   
WHITFIELD:  Right. And, you know, adding insult to injury, there are so many residents who are already beginning to endure major economic hardships because of this weather disaster.  
      In fact this morning, one Texas Congressman told CNN that he believes federal aid will help residents pay the bills. Listen.  
      (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)  
DANA BASH, CNN HOST:  I assume you're going to do something to help people pay those bills. Are you saying you'll use the disaster relief funding from the federal government?  
REP. MICHAEL MCCAUL (R-TX):  Yes. Yes, that's the current plan with the federal assistance will be able to help the homeowners both to repair. We have a lot of waterways, a lot of water damage, pipes bursting but also their electricity bills as well.  
      (END VIDEO CLIP)  
WHITFIELD:  So today the mayors of Houston and Fort Worth both said the state should pay for these sky-high water bills, power bills -- where are you on this?   
NIRENBERG:  Absolutely. It would be unconscionable for bills to go up and for bills to be put on the backs of residents of this state that have been suffering and freezing in their homes for the last week through no fault of their own.  
      This was a total failure by the state's energy management, and they need to be held accountable. And in doing so, certainly not put the cost of this crisis on the backs of Texans.  
      And as far as I'm concerned, that bill should be sent to ERCOT. And there will be hell to pay if there is any notion that the residents of this state should pay for this disaster.   
WHITFIELD:  All the best to you and everyone there in San Antonio, Mayor Ron Nirenberg. Thanks so much.   
NIRENBERG:  Thank you.  
      END   
Load-Date: February 22, 2021



End of Document


California Ramps Up Vaccinations In Underserved Areas; Midair Engine Failure On Boeing Jet; Millions Of Texans Without Safe Water; Harsh Weather Causes Backlog In Inoculations; Gaza To Start COVID-19 Vaccine Rollout On Monday; Pro-Democracy Protests Continue After Myanmar Coup; Biden Visits Bob Dole After Cancer Diagnosis; Naomi Osaka Wins 2021 Australian Open. Aired 4-5a ET
CNN CNN NEWSROOM 4:00 AM EST
February 21, 2021 Sunday

Copyright 2021 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved 
Section: NEWS; International
Length: 6470 words
Byline: Kim Brunhuber, Lucy Kafanov, Omar Jimenez, Paul Vercammen, Salma Abdelaziz, Sam Kiley, Selina Wang, Arlette Saenz
Guests: Geoffrey Thomas, James Bartlett, Jarrod Casler
Highlight: At a FEMA site in Los Angeles, California emergency services, the U.S. Army and the California National Guard are vaccinating residents of an underserved community, primarily Latino. A United Airlines jet suffered an explosive right engine failure shortly after takeoff Saturday, the Boeing 777-200 returning to Denver International Airport and thankfully landing safely. Federal resources are headed to Texas as thousands of National Guard troops are helping get food and water into the state.
Body




[04:00:00]
(MUSIC PLAYING)
KIM BRUNHUBER, CNN ANCHOR (voice-over): Welcome to all of you watching here in the United States, Canada and around the world, I'm Kim Brunhuber. Ahead on CNN NEWSROOM:
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
BRUNHUBER (voice-over): And joining me now is Angelica Salas. She's the executive director for the Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights of Los Angeles.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
BRUNHUBER (voice-over): A fiery engine failure on a Boeing 777 with more than 200 people on board, the plane dropping debris for a mile before somehow landing safely.
The bitter cold temperatures over Texas but the water problems remain, with more than half the state having no access to clean water.
And the winter weather delayed vaccinations and caused transportation delays, forcing some distribution sites to close up shop. (MUSIC PLAYING)
BRUNHUBER: Passengers and onlookers are counting their blessings after a midair emergency risked becoming a deadly disaster. Parts of a passenger plane plunged from the sky above Colorado after a Boeing 777 blew an engine. It eventually landed safely. Fascination quickly turned to concern for those watching from the ground.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
(CROSSTALK)
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Hey, can you grab Josie, so that she doesn't get hit by something?
(END VIDEO CLIP) BRUNHUBER: Pieces of the jet rained down on suburban Broomfield near Denver, ending up in front yards and soccer fields. A witness described the moment it happened to CNN earlier.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
KIERAN CAIN, WITNESS: I was playing with our two kids at the local elementary school on the basketball court, just having fun. An airplane was flying really high overhead. And basically what a sounded like a sonic boom made everybody look up.
As we did, we could see there was a giant black cloud of smoke high up in the sky immediately followed by, you know, what looked like pieces of the aircraft really just coming off. And basically a shower of things that were falling out of the sky.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
BRUNHUBER: The engine failure happened shortly after takeoff. It forced the Hawaii-bound flight to return to Denver International Airport. Here is audio of the moment the mayday call went out.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Mayday, mayday, United 328 -- United 328, heavy mayday, mayday, aircraft --
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: 320, again.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Denver departure United 328, heavy mayday, aircraft just experienced an engine failure. Need return immediately.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
BRUNHUBER: All 241 passengers and crew on the United Airlines flight made it off safely. The airline says most have since boarded a new flight to Hawaii. Incredibly, there have been no reports of injuries. CNN's Lucy Kafanov is onsite, covering this story and filed this update a short time ago.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
LUCY KAFANOV, CNN CORRESPONDENT: So we are in Broomfield, Colorado. This was the area most impacted by the debris raining down from United Flight 328, the Boeing 777 that took off from Denver's International Airport. It was bound for Honolulu but minutes after takeoff, the pilots reported a problem with the right engine.
They then turned around and, as they were doing that flying over this area, residents, eyewitnesses on the ground reported hearing the sound of an explosion. One eyewitness described it as a sonic boom and that's when they saw black smoke coming from the plane and pieces of metal raining down.
Just to give you a sense of the scope of the debris field, I mean, down the block behind this cop car is a massive soccer field. There's a dog park, a lot of folks out and about earlier in the day, playing soccer, walking their dogs, enjoying the nicer weather that Denver had earlier in the afternoon.
All of that disrupted by this incredible event. The Broomfield police said they used a massive amount of police tape to section off these areas because, anywhere you go here, you can find pieces of debris. They're still urging residents to report those pieces. They're saying you shouldn't touch that, get the authorities involved.
And a miracle that no one was hurt, not any of the 241 people on board that craft nor any of the residents here on the streets of Colorado -- Lucy Kafanov, CNN, Broomfield, Colorado.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
[04:05:00]
BRUNHUBER: We have more now from those watching on the ground. This video comes to us from Tyler Thal, he spoke to CNN about why he decided to take out his phone and start recording.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
TYLER THAL, EYEWITNESS: I just couldn't believe it. We were on a walk with our family, just like any other Saturday and there's a low flying airplane. I looked up.
And as I'm looking at it, I actually see, you know, fire burst out of the plane, an explosion.
So you know, I was kind of in shock at first and then you start thinking, oh my gosh, is this plane going to go down?
So I mentioned it to my family. I didn't know what else to do. I pulled out my camera. I grabbed my phone. I didn't know if I was going to call someone or not or who I'd call, but I took the video.
Once the sound from the explosion hit, it was very frightening for my daughter. You could hear her on the video. I just didn't know what to do.
We're far enough away. I wasn't concerned for our safety necessarily, but knowing the area, I knew that was over Broomfield and that is just a populated area, you know, the debris I saw on that soccer field, I'd been there with my family.
So you know, I was absolutely concerned for the people on the ground and the people on that plane. And I'm just thankful they all -- they were all OK.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
BRUNHUBER: As you can imagine, things were even more worrisome for those actually on the plane. Several passengers later described the tense situation.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: All of a sudden there was a loud sound and then it got really, really bad. I thought lightning struck the plane at first.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Initially I think it was certainly panic but I think people did a good job of calming down.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: All of a sudden there's a big explosion out my window. We looked at each other, my wife and I, and held hands and just wished our kids, that we would see them again.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: I think the pilots, they really had a huge hand in making sure everybody felt safe and comfortable.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
BRUNHUBER: All right. Joining me now is Geoffrey Thomas, the editor- in-chief of airlineratings.com.
Thanks so much for joining us. I want to go straight to the dramatic pictures of the engine in flight that we were seeing there.
What can you tell from watching it, as it is sort of wobbling around there in tatters?
GEOFFREY THOMAS, EDITOR-IN-CHIEF, AIRLINERATINGS.COM: Yes, Kim. What appears to have happened is a catastrophic fan blade failure in the front fan of the engine, the front section of the engine.
And that's been ingested back into the core of the engine, it's caused the massive explosion and has been very severe, severe enough to cause the cowling -- or the covers that go around the engine -- to rip away from the -- rip away from the engine, exposing it to the passengers.
And, of course, I could also see the fire inside as well. Now this event, this sort of event of this magnitude, is very rare. But having said that, we had a Boeing 777 of Japan Airlines, flying between Okinawa and Tokyo in December, which suffered an almost identical event, with a Pratt & Whitney engine.
And also United Airlines itself suffered a 777 Pratt & Whitney engine, exactly the same event occurred between San Francisco and Honolulu in February 2018.
So while it's a very rare occurrence, we have had three involving a 777 and a Pratt & Whitney engine in the last three years.
BRUNHUBER: We should emphasize we don't know for sure what happened.
But what does suggest to you that it was that fan blade failure?
THOMAS: Well, to do that much damage to the engine, it would need to be a major failure of a component or a massive ingestion of something. But typically it's a -- typically it's a fan blade.
It could also have been the, where the intake is for the engine, part of the paneling there could have come away and been ingested into the engine.
So at this stage it is, as you suggest, speculation. We're going on what's previously happened in two previous events as a likely scenario. But it will be quite some time before the crash investigators, the NTSB, are able to give us more detail of exactly what happened.
BRUNHUBER: I mean, something like that, it must affect the controllability of the aircraft.
What's the challenge for the pilot, trying to fly and to land a plane in that condition?
THOMAS: Well, you've got, first of all, a twin engine airplane like a 777, 787, A330, A350, they are all designed to fly on one engine.
[04:10:00]
THOMAS: That part is not an issue. Where the problem comes is where you have the vibration of that engine causing controllability issues.
If the engine -- if the damage to the engine moves away from there and, for instance, we get puncher marks -- punchers of the wing, we get control -- hydraulic lines damaged, electrical wires damaged, that could introduce further problems for the pilot in the controlling of the aircraft when you get additional subsequent damage to the airframe.
We don't appear to have had any of that in this particular case. The big issue was the vibration and, also, of course, to get the airplane on the ground as quickly as possible.
BRUNHUBER: And then, as much as there was danger in the sky, there was danger on the ground, too, with all of that debris flying through the air. It seems like a miracle that no one was hurt.
THOMAS: Indeed, Kim, you have hit the nail right on the head. It is a miracle. There was a lot of debris showering down from that aircraft. Some of that debris or a lot of that debris is heavy.
There were certainly some minor parts that were floating down because they are a composite structure, very light. But there were some very big pieces that, if they hit anybody, they probably would have killed them. So it certainly was a miracle.
BRUNHUBER: So then, you know, with that debris field, all of that stuff will be very key to sort of piecing together literally what happened.
How do they go about doing this?
THOMAS: Yes, well, the FAA quickly put out a tweet, a statement on social media streams as well, asking residents of Broomfield and surrounding areas not to touch the debris. Leave it exactly where it was. Just advise the FAA, the NTSB, that there is a piece of debris in their front or back yard so they can examine it because we certainly don't want residents picking it up and souveniring it because they may be souveniring a very, very important part in the investigation.
BRUNHUBER: Absolutely. Well, listen, thank you so much for your analysis on this story. We really appreciate it. Geoffrey Thomas.
THOMPSON: Pleasure, Kim.
BRUNHUBER: Coming up on CNN NEWSROOM, the deepening crisis of broken water lines in Texas, 14 million people across the state have no ready access to fresh water. We will have that story just ahead.
And amid all the problems in Texas, we're also learning about heroes. Ahead, how the drivers of these jeeps there are helping front-line workers and the elderly. Stay with us.
(MUSIC PLAYING)
[04:15:00]
(MUSIC PLAYING)
BRUNHUBER: A major water crisis has developed in Texas, leading to long lines for bottled water. The deadly winter storm that hit much of the U.S. disrupted hundreds of public water systems.
On Saturday, more than 14 million Texans were without water and still more than 200,000 customers are without power across several states. Community organizations and National Guard troops are helping to get food and water to those in need. CNN's Omar Jimenez has more from Austin.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: The water's not even bubbling.
OMAR JIMENEZ, CNN CORRESPONDENT (voice-over): The lights may be on but across parts of Texas the water isn't. Drinking water still needed.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: There's a panic mode that we didn't have enough drinking water. We would love showers but we'll get that when we get our water turned back on.
JIMENEZ (voice-over): Texans waiting in long lines just to pick up cases of water, with nearly half the state under boil water advisories.
MAYOR STEVE ADLER (D), AUSTIN, TX: This is a community of people that are scared and upset and angry. We're eventually going to need some better answers. But right now we're just trying to get water to our neighbors.
JIMENEZ (voice-over): But it's not just drinking water. Some residents can't even flush the toilet without melting snow.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: We relocated back to our house, five adults and two dogs, and we started harvesting snow because we also lost water at that point. Harvesting snow for toilet water.
JIMENEZ (voice-over): That lack of water making it difficult for those suffering from kidney failure. Some dialysis clinics have been forced to temporarily close, meaning patients have to go to the hospital to keep their kidneys from shutting down.
DR. PAUL NADER, UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS DELL MEDICAL SCHOOL: So we've had double, sometimes triple coverages of physicians at all the hospitals. We cover many hospitals in Austin.
Ordinarily we finish most of our dialysis between about 8:00 and 5:00 or 6:00 at night for a regular day. We were working 2:00 or 3:00 in the morning, dialyzing patients in the hospital.
JIANG (voice-over): President Joe Biden approving a major disaster declaration for Texas, freeing up more help from FEMA.
REP. ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ (D-NY): You know, when disaster strikes, this is not just an issue for Texans. This is an issue for our entire country. Disasters don't strike everyone equally.
When you already have so many families in the state and across the country that are on the brink, that can't even afford an emergency to begin with, when you have a disaster like this, it can just set people back for years.
JIMENEZ (voice-over): As residents wait for the water and power to come back, some still forced to use their cars for warmth. Others, if they're lucky, find shelter in a hotel.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: The guests, frankly, it's been the equivalent of camping indoors.
JIMENEZ: And moving forward, officials here are going to start looking at what exactly went wrong over this past week. Among what they're investigating is that many customers here in Texas reported getting extremely high power bills, even amid this catastrophe.
So Texas officials are investigating that.
On the water front, when could we see the water come back to Texas?
Well, in some places, we're well on our way. In Houston, for example, they've reached that minimum threshold for water pressure. Here in Austin, officials are optimistic they can get water citywide by the end of the weekend -- Omar Jimenez, CNN, Austin, Texas.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
[04:20:00]
BRUNHUBER: And joining me now are James Bartlett and Jarrod Casler, members of the San Angelo, Texas, Jeep Club. Many members have been helping out during the crisis by giving rides on the icy roads to first responders as well as delivering food to the elderly.
Gentlemen, thank you so much for joining us here. Just so people understand a bit about the jeep club, you are both veterans. And the club itself no stranger to doing good things, things like organizing cleanups and so on. But this is really going above and beyond.
James, how did this particular idea come about?
JAMES BARTLETT, MEMBER, SAN ANGELO JEEP CLUB: Well, as everybody knows the snowstorm here started pretty early -- or late last week, I apologize. And we are sitting around and discussing just something we could do to help the community.
And the idea came in to kind of get together and get as many folks in the jeep club as we could to just give rides to our local hospital staff. And Jarrod and I talk about it and just put a post up on my personal Facebook. And it just took off and blew up from there really.
BRUNHUBER: And, Jarrod, I mean, tell me, we're seeing some of the pictures that you guys took and sent to us. Tell us what it's been like out there, what kinds of things you've been asked to do and some of the challenges you've run into.
JARROD CASLER, MEMBER, SAN ANGELO JEEP CLUB: One of the -- I would say one of our biggest things is there has been -- Texans are not very used to this amount of snow this fast.
And so when it all came in like this, people were having trouble getting to work. A lot of the people's cars couldn't get out of their driveways. Nobody had snow shovels. People just were not prepared.
So we had a lot of people asking us to pull their cars out of ditches. I know I personally had to pull a bunch of cars out of parking spots because they couldn't even leave the store.
Then we came together and we started giving ride after ride after ride to all the nurses, different first responders. And then the city asked us to help them because they had to shut down their transportation.
They asked us to help transport people from their houses to the warming shelters when all of that -- when everyone's power went out. So we ended up doing a lot of that type of stuff.
And then meals for the elderly, all of their volunteers could also not make it because their vehicles couldn't travel in this. So they reached out to us. So we also did that for them.
BRUNHUBER: It's pretty amazing that the city would reach out to you guys as civilians.
How did people react when you guys show up?
I mean, you are not first responders, you are not even the AAA.
How do people react?
CASLER: It seems like people wanted -- it seems like people -- you know, of course, they were upset that the city wasn't doing it and transporting people all night long. But when they saw us they were all happy again and all the worry went out of their eyes. And they were just happy they could get somewhere warm.
BRUNHUBER: Yes, you can imagine.
James, now that the crisis has expanded from, you know, being just about icy roads and facing the cold to access to food and especially water, how has that changed your mission?
BARTLETT: Well, I mean, for the most part, our roads down here are clear. So it kind of has changed it to where we are not going to be that primary means of transportation for folks. We are still able to offer, you know, ability to get out to get water or to deliver those things if needs be.
We haven't had anybody personally reach out that I know of contact the club. A handful of our members have had people still reach out, some elderly folks who can't get out, people that are further out of town.
And so a lot of our members have stepped up and continued that mission basically on their own, really, just helping take things to people that needed them and just giving them that assistance that, right now, they really desperately need.
BRUNHUBER: I mean, how about yourselves and your families?
I know the city is under a boil water advisory and some folks don't have any water.
How are you and your members doing?
Jarrod, I will start with you.
CASLER: Well, I'm currently sitting at work at the fire station and we've had bottles of water -- we have an amazing community. So people from all over the community have brought cases of water to us so that we have water, so that we can cook for ourselves at night.
The city has -- they're doing all the water testing and, of course, they did the boil water notice. And now they're starting to deliver -- you're allowed to bring a container if you don't -- because a lot of people still don't have water. You are allowed to bring a container and they're filling up containers for people, so that you can just flush a toilet at this point.
BRUNHUBER: And what about you?
BARTLETT: Well, right now -- for right now our neighborhood, I know -- because we are on a different part of the water system, so we do have some water. Now not real good water pressure. But again, the water issue is something we had been dealing with the entire week leading up to the snowstorm. So that's nothing new right now for us. But I know at least in my neighborhood, it's been great.
[04:25:00]
BARTLETT: I mean, everybody has reached out, everybody is trying to help everyone else. My wife, when I was out running folks the other day, was actually telling me that neighbors were going up to other people's houses, making sure they had water, making sure they had everything that they needed and just sharing whatever they could, basically with their fellow neighbors and just trying to help everyone out as best they can.
BRUNHUBER: That's where I want to leave it. It's such a great spirit we're seeing in the community, as horrible as this crisis has been. It's just amazing to -- how many people like yourselves are stepping up and really helping out in their community. And it's really a heartwarming story.
Thank you so much for talking to us and thank you so much for everything you're doing out there. We really appreciate it.
BARTLETT: Thank you.
CASLER: Thank you for having us, sir.
BRUNHUBER: The deep freeze in Texas is beginning to thaw but the crisis isn't over yet.
(WEATHER REPORT)
BRUNHUBER: Coming up on CNN NEWSROOM, brutal winter weather over much of the U.S. has delayed vaccine shipments and getting doses into arms. We will show you how it's also creating uneven vaccine distribution, even in the same city.
Plus the U.K. has been in national lockdown since early January. Why those restrictions are set to ease. We will have a live report from London next. Stay with us.
(MUSIC PLAYING)
[04:30:00]
(MUSIC PLAYING)
BRUNHUBER: Welcome back. Thank you watching us here in the United States, Canada and around the world. I'm Kim Brunhuber and you're watching CNN NEWSROOM.
Severe winter storms have hampered efforts to get more Americans vaccinated against COVID-19. There is now a backlog of vaccine doses waiting to be shipped. And many states are postponing vaccine appointments. White House officials say vaccine deliveries will be ramped up to compensate. Hospitalizations from COVID-19 are dropping in the U.S. New data shows they are now at the lowest level since early November. That's when cases and deaths were picking up right before the holidays.
And that's not the only bit of good news out of the U.S. A new study from the Mayo Clinic shows coronavirus vaccines may actually prevent infection, not just symptoms. But on the ground some places are running out of doses and turning people away. Paul Vercammen is in Los Angeles for us.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
PAUL VERCAMMEN, CNN CORRESPONDENT: When it comes to the vaccines in Los Angeles, it's the story of the agony and the ecstasy. We'll start with the ecstasy. They've been moving through about 5,000 people a day at this newly opened site at Cal State Los Angeles.
This is the FEMA site, along with California emergency services and the U.S. Army, 220 soldiers. We've thrown in the California National Guard as well. They're putting shots into arms at a rapid clip.
This is designed to serve an underserved community, primarily Latino in this part of Los Angeles. They've had no issues with vaccine supply here. In fact, it's moving smoothly.
But at Dodger Stadium, they had to shut down the site. They just couldn't get shipments from Kentucky and Tennessee. They don't know when they'll reopen at Dodger Stadium. But frustration as, lo, tens of thousands of people had to be turned away.
Now back here to Cal State Los Angeles. We spoke with a soldier, an Army medic. He had tours of duty in Mosul among other places, two tours in Iraq. He saw mass casualties, gunshot victims, people who had stepped on IEDs. And now he's fighting a virus on American soil.
SGT. GERRARDO GUZMAN, U.S. ARMY: I was trained to be a life saver. So that's my primary job. But this is also what I joined the army to do, not only just to help people overseas but also to help people at home.
That's one thing I'm extremely proud to be doing at this time. The fight against COVID has been a fight that we've been fighting for the past year. And it's been -- I'm glad to be fighting against it.
VERCAMMEN: Now also here in Los Angeles County, which is a patchwork of vaccine sites, the L.A. County sites have been up and running, different from the L.A. City sites and as you can see behind me this new pilot program site, one of the 100 proposed by the Biden-Harris administration.
[04:35:00]
VERCAMMEN: It is moving people through at a fairly fast pace.
Reporting from Los Angeles, I'm Paul Vercammen. Now back to you.
(END VIDEOTAPE) BRUNHUBER: The road map to easing coronavirus measures in the United Kingdom is set to be unveiled on Monday. Prime minister Boris Johnson is spending the weekend finalizing details. The country entered its third national lockdown back in early January. Mr. Johnson had said that reopening schools is the priority.
This is all thanks to the success of the U.K.'s vaccine rollout. It's hoped every adult in the country can get a first dose of the vaccine by the end of July. Here to discuss further is CNN's Salma Abdelaziz in London.
It sounds as though there's welcome news for many in the U.K.
What are we expect to go hear on Monday?
SALMA ABDELAZIZ, CNN PRODUCER: Kim, as it usually goes here, there's good news and then there's usually some tough news to follow.
So the good news today, the government making a pledge that everyone, every adult in this country, should be able to get their vaccine by July 31st. That is a month ahead of schedule. They're also now promising that all of those over 50 should be able to get their vaccine by mid-April. That's a couple of weeks ahead of schedule.
The prime minister saying that he wants to see the country's vaccination program move faster and further, although it's already the third highest in the world. He wants it to move even faster, vaccinate people even quicker.
But vaccinations do not necessarily mean that restrictions and rules can be lifted. The health secretary, Matt Hancock, was on air just about an hour ago. He said that the prime minister is still determining what he will announce tomorrow in terms of a road map to ease lockdown restrictions.
The health secretary also said there will be enough supplies to vaccinate people, to vaccinate all the adults by the end of July but that that does not mean that restrictions can be loosened anytime soon.
Yes, although you can be vaccinated, we're still learning more about whether or not that means you can still pass on the virus, Kim. So a lot of data, a lot of numbers will be revealed tomorrow, I think, that indicate what are the hospitalization rates currently, what are the infection rates currently, what is the latest science on transmission for those who are vaccinated.
The order of things should be that schools are the priority, March 8th, that's the plan, that's the earliest that they could reopen. That might be a staggered reopening to allow for students and teachers to be tested.
Second in line, nonessential shops, essentially reopening the economy once that's safe and finally the prime minister should give us a timeline for when the hospitality industry, hotels, bars and restaurants will open as well. It will be a gradual and steady and irreversible reopening.
But all of these steps have to be taken carefully. We do know one of the restrictions that will be eased is on care home residents. Starting March 8th, they can have one regular visitor and now they can hold hands with that regular visitor, a little bit relief for people who have lived under really tough rules.
BRUNHUBER: Great news there. Thank you so much, Salma Abdelaziz in London.
Australia's prime minister is now among the first in his country to get a coronavirus vaccination.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
BRUNHUBER (voice-over): Here this was the scene as Scott Morrison got a dose of the Pfizer BioNTech shot. He says he wants to prove the vaccine is safe and get it to the most vulnerable. The mass vaccination program is scheduled to start on Monday. Some 60,000 doses are expected to be administered by the end of the month.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
BRUNHUBER: Palestinian health officials say the first vaccinations in Gaza will also start on Monday. Health officials say 2,000 doses of Russia's Sputnik V vaccine arrived from Ramallah in recent days. CNN's Sam Kiley is standing by in Jerusalem.
Sam, it will be a welcome moment for those in Gaza; though, I imagine, with that relief, is the frustration that it's taking so long.
SAM KILEY, CNN SENIOR INTERNATIONAL CORRESPONDENT: Well, yes, the Palestinian Authority -- and this is where it gets complicated, Kim -- is in charge of vaccinations in areas under their control. That's most of the West Bank but also in Gaza, where they are not in political control. Gaza is dominated by the Hamas group, which is designated a terrorist organization in the U.S.
Nonetheless there are just 2,000 vaccinations due to arrive from the Palestinian Authority there on Monday, alongside another 20,000, hope to come in, from the United Arab Emirates, a donation there from a Gulf nation.
Bitterly criticized by the Palestinian leadership for its normalization policies with Israel, which has resulted now in the swearing-in recently of the Emirati ambassador to what used to be called, in that part of the world, the Zionist entity, now very much Israel.
So good news a little bit for the Palestinians, although they are a fair way off from mass vaccination campaigns.
Here in Israel, the mass vaccinating campaign, which has been leading the world, has resulted in a reduction in the level of restrictions on the country today.
[04:40:00]
KILEY: Although the airspace remains closed until March the 6th. And under discussion and indeed it's going to be interesting to see how they apply it, the Israeli authorities will be bringing in what they call a green passport, a vaccination certificate, that would allow people to enter certain areas, where people, confined together, are likely to transmit the disease, such as gyms and elsewhere.
That is being challenged on human rights and freedom grounds by its critics. But really the Israelis are concerned that the vaccination campaign is plateauing and they need to get over the line to their target, vaccinating everybody by the end of March or anybody who needs to be vaccinated by the end of March.
They are concerned that they might need to use a bit of the old stick as well as the carrot to get the vaccination campaign to that level, Kim.
BRUNHUBER: Interesting. Thanks for walking us through all of that. Sam Kiley in Jerusalem.
Coming up on CNN NEWSROOM, Myanmar protesters refusing to cave to political violence. The latest on their fight to end a military coup just ahead.
(MUSIC PLAYING)
(MUSIC PLAYING)
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
BRUNHUBER (voice-over): There were more pro-democracy protests in Myanmar today and they followed the deadliest day of demonstrations so far. A volunteer emergency worker tells Reuters two people were killed and 23 were wounded Saturday, when police opened fire on protesters in Mandalay.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
BRUNHUBER: World leaders are watching all of this with alarm. They're warning military leaders against a continued crackdown on demonstrations. For more on this, Selina Wang joins us from Tokyo.
The escalation and use of violence by the military, is that a sign that the protests and especially the campaign of civil disobedience are having an effect?
Or is it just pushing the military into a corner here?
[04:45:00]
SELINA WANG, CNN CORRESPONDENT: Well, Kim, in reaction to these protests that have continued for 16 consecutive days, we are seeing more violence coming from the police. But despite that, we are not seeing these protesters back down. We've spoken to many, who say they are fearful of the arrests. They are fearful of more of these early morning raids that have been happening. But they say they are fighting for their future.
Many of these protesters have also lived through the brutal military rule. They've tasted democracy. They are not ready to give it up.
You had mentioned the violence that happened on Saturday, when police in Mandalay opened fire, killing at least two and injuring at least 20. This is according to Reuters and AFP, who had cited emergency workers on the ground.
CNN has confirmed that live rounds as well as tear gas was used to disperse the protesters. In one video CNN had, you can see people fleeing from the police, taking shelter and hiding wherever they can.
In another video, you can see a person being taken away by medics. And this follows the death of a young woman on Friday, who had a shot to her head. This young woman has now become a symbol for the movement, galvanizing the protesters who, Kim, every day, are risking arrest.
BRUNHUBER: Absolutely. I mentioned earlier the growing global backlash among the latest that we saw in terms of international condemnation, the British foreign secretary and the Singaporean foreign ministry.
What challenges do countries face in their response to this takeover having an impact while not harming civilians?
WANG: Kim, that's exactly right. This is an extremely challenging balancing act for countries around the world.
For instance, you take a look at the reaction from the U.S., U.S. President Joe Biden said that U.S. will be sanctioning Myanmar's military leaders as well as imposing strong export controls. Biden has stressed that these sanctions will only target Myanmar's military.
But there still are concerns that the measures will impact the lives of ordinary innocent people. In fact, the U.S. had imposed those wide- reaching sanctions on the military in the 1990s and the 2000s, which led to a devastating impact on Myanmar's economy.
In fact, some analysts say that those measures had an even greater impact on Myanmar's ordinary citizens than the military rule did.
Here in Japan, they are also in a predicament. The country has condemned the military coup but they've also taken a more cautious stance. The concern here is that efforts to isolate Myanmar will push it further away from democratic countries while pushing it closer into China's hands.
Japan is also very concerned about the business ramifications. Japanese companies have invested massively into Myanmar in recent years. Its carmakers were among the first to enter the market. And the strategic importance of Myanmar is really showing that, for these Asian countries, like Japan, cutting off ties is very difficult. Kim. BRUNHUBER: Absolutely. All right. Thank you so much, CNN's Selina Wang in Tokyo.
The head of the International Atomic Energy Agency is now in Tehran to discuss Iran's nuclear program. The trip comes after Iran suggested it would reduce cooperation with the organization.
Just days ago, the Biden administration announced it's willing to talk with Iran about the way forward. The nations have been at a stalemate since the Trump administration withdrew from the 2015 Iran nuclear deal. Iran wants the U.S. to lift all sanctions imposed by the Trump administration.
Donald Trump's absence from the public spotlight will end next Saturday, just five weeks after leaving the White House. A source tells CNN he will be speaking at CPAC, the upcoming Conservative Political Action Conference.
Sources say Trump's vice president, Mike Pence, won't be there. CNN has also earned that one of Trump's former campaign managers met with him at Mar-a-lago this week.
U.S. President Joe Biden took some time this week to visit a former colleague and represent that bipartisan friendships do exist. Arlette Saenz explains.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
ARLETTE SAENZ, CNN CORRESPONDENT: President Biden made a surprise stop on Saturday to visit a longtime friend, former senator Bob Dole. He had announced earlier that he was recently diagnosed with stage IV lung cancer. He'll begin treatment for that on Monday.
The president spent a little over an hour visiting With dole at the Watergate. The two men have a longtime relationship after serving decades together on Capitol Hill. Bob Dole is a Republican and Joe Biden a Democrat.
So the two forged this bipartisan relationship, sometimes being at odds with one another, but still forging that friendship during their time in the Senate.
[04:50:00]
The president was asked how Bob Dole was doing. The president says he's doing well -- Arlette Saenz, CNN, the White House.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
BRUNHUBER: Britain's hospitalized Prince Philip got a visit on Saturday from his son, Prince Charles. The 99-year-old Duke of Edinburg is expected to stay in the hospital in London through the weekend for observation and rest.
Prince Philip was admitted on Tuesday after feeling unwell, according to a royal source. This wasn't an emergency or related to the coronavirus. A source says his wife, Queen Elizabeth, remains at Windsor Castle near London.
We'll be right back.
(MUSIC PLAYING)
(MUSIC PLAYING)
BRUNHUBER: The men's singles final at the Australian Open tennis tournament is happening right now and we're keeping a close eye, as number one rated Novak Djokovic of Serbia, the defending champ, faces Russian Daniil Medvedev for the title.
Djokovic just took the first set 7-5.
On the women's side Japan's Naomi Osaka showed once again why she is the one to beat. The 23-year-old won the title in until just under 1.5 hours. After the match she talked about not only her 21-match win streak but about becoming more consistent. But it's her long-term goal that might be even more impressive.
[04:55:00]
BRUNHUBER: Listen to this.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
NAOMI OSAKA, AUSTRALIAN OPEN CHAMPION: Hopefully, I play long enough to play a girl that said that I was once her favorite player or something. For me I think that's the coolest thing that could ever happen to me. I think I have those feelings of, you know, watching my favorite players.
Unfortunately, I didn't get to play Li Na. But, yes, I just think that that's how the sport moves forward.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
BRUNHUBER: And this win is Osaka's fourth grand slam title and second Australian Open win.
A 21-year-old British woman has become the youngest female to row solo across the Atlantic Ocean. Jasmine Harrison completed the 3,000 mile or 4,800-kilometer journey from Spain to Antigua on Saturday.
It took her just over 70 days to complete the challenge, according to organizer Atlantic Campaigns. Harrison said she had a near collision with a drilling ship and two capsizes and she ate lots of peanut butter and Nutella along the way. She hopes her journey brings, quote, "inspiration to young people that it is OK to go at things alone."
An Ohio bomb squad made a surprise discovery, responding to a call about a suspicious bag found outside a church. Well, they weren't met with ticking but purring coming from the bag. Six newborn kittens and their mother were discovered with a note saying the mother went into labor the day before. The cats are now safely in a foster home.
Much better story there. That wraps this hour of CNN NEWSROOM. I'm Kim Brunhuber. I will be back in just a moment with more news. Please do stay with us.
Load-Date: February 21, 2021



End of Document


Downtown water main break blocks traffic, leads to boil advisory
Herald-Times (Bloomington, Indiana)
February 21, 2021 Sunday

Copyright 2021 The Herald-Times (Bloomington, Ind.)
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 203 words
Byline: Herald-Times, Bloomington, Ind.
Body




Feb. 21—A water main broke Saturday at the intersection of East Fourth and South Walnut streets in downtown Bloomington. The intersection was closed so City of Bloomington Utilities could complete repairs.
Motorists are advised to find an alternate route or adjust their speed accordingly when traveling near the work zone and crews.
Water service was shut off for some addresses in the vicinity; those customers are now under a precautionary boil water advisory.
Unless otherwise notified, the precautionary advisory will be lifted 24 hours after water service is restored. As addresses are confirmed, they will be listed at bloomington.in.gov/utilities. Only those addresses which lost water service are under the precautionary boil water advisory.
Those affected should:
* Immediately after your normal water pressure is restored, run COLD water from a sink or tub until clear water flows from the faucet.
* Boil all water used for drinking, cooking, and oral hygiene for at least 5 minutes prior to consumption. It is not necessary to boil water for other uses.
___ (c)2021 the Herald-Times (Bloomington, Ind.) Visit the Herald-Times (Bloomington, Ind.) at www.heraldtimesonline.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.
Load-Date: February 21, 2021



End of Document


Airliner Engine Fails, Rains Debris Over Denver Suburb; U.S. Closes In On 500,000 COVID-19 Deaths; Big Week Ahead For Biden White House; Internal Divisions Wrack Both Republicans And Democrats In Washington; Desperate Texas Families Seek Water, Food; United Airlines Grounds Planes After Engine Failure Incident; U.S. Closes In On 500,000 COVID-19 Deaths. Aired 6-7p ET
CNN CNN NEWSROOM 6:00 PM EST
February 21, 2021 Sunday

Copyright 2021 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved 
Section: NEWS; Domestic
Length: 6256 words
Byline: Pamela Brown, Omar Jimenez, Selina Wang, Richard Quest, Polo Sandoval, Pete Muntean, Arlette Saenz, Ryan Lizza, Natasha Chen
Guests: Sarah Isgur, Ashish Jha
Highlight: Two were injured as Boeing 747 engine debris falls on Dutch town. Airline parts fell in mile-long stretch of Denver suburbs. President Biden is said to mark 500,000 deaths with candle ceremony. Democratic moderates and progressives are clashing on hourly wage, student debt and a Cabinet nominee, while Republicans split on Trump's influence over the party.
Body




[18:00:00]
PAMELA BROWN, CNN HOST: Good evening. I'm Pamela brown in Washington. Welcome to our viewers in the United States and around the world. You are live in the CNN Newsroom on this Sunday.
A terrifying moment caught on a homeowner's surveillance camera when pieces of a commercial airline are suddenly smashed into the ground. This happened Saturday afternoon near Denver. Watch and listen.
This is Broomfield, Colorado, a city in the flight path for Denver International Airport. People in Broomfield were unaware that a United Airlines 777 was overhead with an engine on fire and dropping pieces to the ground below. Incredibly, nobody was hurt despite metal pieces raining down across a one-mile debris field. Some homes and vehicles were damaged but no injuries. Much more on the investigation into what happened in a moment.
But this just in to CNN just a moment ago, confirmation of a similar almost identical incident that happened on the same day but overseas, a Boeing 747 taking off from the Netherlands suddenly dropped parts of the plane onto the ground below. In this case, people were hurt. We are working to get more details on that. Plus, what aviation officials are doing in the aftermath of those incidents. Lots ahead on the show.
Let's first go to Denver and CNN's Omar Jimenez. So, Omar, you're close to Broomfield. People must still be so rattled from that amazing sight of a giant plane with pieces falling from the sky. What are airport officials saying today?
OMAR JIMENEZ, CNN CORRESPONDENT: That's right, Pamela. People on the ground amazed that this wasn't worse than what it ended up being. And here at Denver International Airport, things are running smoothly again. But, of course, this comes after that right engine failure that we saw happen Saturday afternoon on United Flight 328 shortly after takeoff. And it rained debris in the Broomfield neighborhood just outside of the Denver area here.
Now, again, as it took off, while there were some fragments, these were huge pieces of the engine that were falling, damaging vehicles, damaging homes in some cases but could've destroyed homes, killed people or very at the least injured them. Miraculously, that didn't happen.
Meanwhile in the sky, passengers described hearing a big boom, they looked out and saw that damaged engine missing what at that point were the pieces that had already fallen down to the earth, and passengers were unsure of what was going to happen next.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
TROY LEWIS, UNITED FLIGHT 328 PASSENGER: We took some time to pray with each other, and there were people around me praying. But I felt fairly confident that we were going to make it back to the airport.
As soon as we kind of made the corner and we could see the runway, I made sure our family, we'd tell us each other we loved each other. It makes you also remember all those things that you can easily forget.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
JIMENEZ: Now, thankfully, they were able to return safely to the ground. There were no injuries. They were guided, of course, by the pilots and the crew, and people cheered as they exited the plane. That flight was bound for Honolulu so, luckily, they weren't over the ocean when they realized these issues. They were able to get back fairly quickly.
But at this point, moving forward, the NTSB investigators were out getting as much debris as they could as the investigation now lies in their hands to try and figure out what exactly happened here.
BROWN: Omar Jimenez, thank you so much for bringing us the latest there.
And we're following more breaking news this hour. We have just learned that Japan is reportedly grounding all Boeing 777 aircraft in the fleets of its domestic airlines.
[18:05:07]
This is according to Japan's public news service, NHK. And that follows the dramatic engine fire over Denver's suburb that we've broke last night.
CNN's International Correspondent Selina Wang joins me now on this breaking news. Selina, what can you tell us?
SELINA WANG, CNN INTERNATIONAL CORRESPONDENT (voice over): Well, Pam, as far as we can see, Japan is the first country to take this sort of step following this incident. And according to the national broadcaster, NHK, the Japanese ministry has issued the order to all Nippon airways and Japan Airlines, which have fleets of 19 and 13 of the 777-200 jets respectively.
We have reached out to Boeing for comment. A spokesperson had no comment specifically on Japan's announcement and pointed out that the current Boeing statement about the United incident overall still holds, saying that they are pleased to hear the United Airlines Flight 328 has returned safely to Denver.
Now, what's interesting is that in Japan, something like this has happened before. In December, according to NHK, The transport ministry had instructed domestic carriers to increase inspections of this particular plane after engine damage caused a Japan Airlines jet to make an emergency landing at Naha Airport in Okinawa, Southwestern Japan. Pamela, this is back in December.
According to the NHK, at that time, part of the aircraft engine cover was lost during flight and a hole of about 28 centimeters across was found on its horizontal tail. So right now, as far as we know, in Japan, the ministry said that necessary measures are being studied at this moment. They, of course, do not want to risk another accident like we've already seen. Pam?
BROWN: That's a big move though in Japan. Selina Wang, thanks for bringing us the latest.
And let's go straight to CNN's Richard Quest for more on this. Richard, tell us about this reported decision by the Japanese government to ground all Boeing 777 in their domestic fleets. Do you think this is an overreaction or the right move?
RICHARD QUEST, CNN BUSINESS EDITOR AT LARGE: Well, it's understandable from Japan's point of view because Japan was caught on the back foot with the 787 Dreamliner when the batteries were overheating. It was an ANA aircraft, and Japan wasn't on the forefront in terms of dealing with that.
So my guess is having seen what happened with the 787, and then having seen what happened with the 737 Maxes when there was first one accident, then another before the FAA, before the regulators stepped in, they're saying, well, hang on a second here, there have been several incidents over the last couple of years which have led to assume.
For instance, the United Airlines 777-200, again, it was out of Honolulu-San Francisco route where the engine exploded in very familiar circumstances. And if you look at the pictures, Pamela, it looks a very similar case. Then back you've got what happened with the plane back in December. Now, you've got this particular incident.
I think it's a stretch to try and conflate this with what happened in Amsterdam today with the 747. It may be a connection, it may not be. I think that's a stretch. But what I think you can say is that a body of views is building up. And it's not the aircraft as much as the engine, the Pratt & Whitney engine.
And we know, it's hard to be long (ph) on this, Pamela, but we know that the NTSB has already warned airlines about the maintenance and the supervision of the fan blades on these aircraft. And I'm guessing, educated guess, that this tonight, that's what the Japanese are saying, hang on a second, we need to look more at those engines which are on those aircraft.
BROWN: OK, yes, that's what I wanted to get at. Because, as you said, it appears it's more of an engine problem, which has a different manufacturer, it's not Boeing. And so you would ask then why aren't they focused on grounding the planes with those engines, right, versus the Boeing 777-200. Go ahead.
QUEST: Right, because those engines are on those aircraft, which is why I'm slightly -- let's start from a basic point here, Pamela. Every now and again, not frequently, but every now and again, something falls from an engine or from an aircraft. Usually, it's blocks of ice, it has been from the lavatory, it's sometimes at a cargo door. So for an aircraft to lose a part, it's rare, but it does happen.
What we're looking at here is the case of an engine. In this case, we not only have both here and in Amsterdam, we not only have engine explosions of one sort or another, we have uncontained explosion. In other words, the bits that you're looking at there on the screen at the moment, they're supposed to keep the engine together if a fan blade suddenly piles out or if the combustion engine suddenly blows up.
[18:10:05]
It's supposed to stay together, be contained.
Because, Pamela, what this shows and what Amsterdam shows is that while there's a million and one things the pilot can do once this happens, as we saw here safely, trained, brought the plane down, there's lots of things the pilot can do. There's nothing that the people on the ground can do once this thing starts raining down pieces of engine.
So that's why Japan is looking at this and guessing every airline with the Pratt & Whitney, 400 model in their fleet is going to be going back to that NTSB report and saying, hang on, we need to look again at those fan blades, we need to look at the compressors, we need to look at the engines.
BROWN: Right. Because the big question now in the wake in Japan is will other countries follow suit? And what are we going to see? Are we going to see a domino effect from this?
But on the uncontained point you just made, what is the significance of that? What does that tell us that we saw two uncontained engine failures on these Boeing planes, one in Colorado and the other there in Amsterdam, I mean, on the same day? What does that tell you? What should we make of that?
QUEST: I think a large point that says there's a coincidence and that it's a maintenance issue for the engine or that the fan blades have a problem with the engines because they're both Pratt & Whitney, they're both of similar sort of jet propulsion, there's a commonality, so, yes.
I can make a point that says that there could be some form of -- but can you make that point that they happened on the same day? The answer is no. That is the coincidence, if you like, that those two things happened on the same day because these things do happen so rarely.
I think, if you look at it over a period of months and say, well, we had the United NAT, we had JAL last year, we had Amsterdam today and we had this, and we know that the NTSB has already raised an issue with the fan blades and the maintenance and the inspection for metallurgic issues relating to them, now you're onto something.
But to hang your coat on both of them being on the same day, because I don't think that -- I think that is coincidence, that they happened so close to each other. That is going to be the coincidence. The underlying reason, and I do think you're going to start seeing other regulators, they've been bitten.
They were bitten on the Dreamliner. They were bitten on 737 Max. They are going to say we are not going to be bitten again if there is an underlying issue, and it's an engine issue, it's not a Boeing issue, I think, at this point.
BROWN: Okay Richard Quest, thank you so much for breaking it down for us so we can understand what is going on here. We appreciate you coming on.
QUEST: Thank you.
BROWN: Well, the U.S. is closing in on half a million deaths from COVID-19. And the nation's top infectious disease expert, Dr. Anthony Fauci warns that masks are here to stay for the future.
[18:15:00]
BROWN: On February 21st of last year, the World Health Organization hadn't even declared COVID-19 a pandemic yet and statistics from the CDC show just two dozen Americans had died from this new virus. But just one year later, nearly a half a million people have died from COVID in the U.S.
The New York Times puts it starkly. More Americans have perished from COVID-19 than on the battlefields of World War I, World War II, and the Vietnam War combined. Again, this just happening in one year.
And even as we edge closer to 500,000 lives lost, there are some glimmers of hope. Case counts are down, the death rate is easing, and the U.S. has given an estimated 63 million vaccinations so far.
And as the world races to get ahead of the coronavirus mutations, CNN's Polo Sandoval joins me with the latest on the vaccine efforts here in U.S.
So, Polo, you're in New York, where vaccine shipments have been delayed due to bad weather. Where do things stand now?
POLO SANDOVAL, CNN CORRESPONDENT: Fewer than a thousand doses of that, at least the first dose of the vaccine, Pam, available to New Yorkers. And certainly a lot of people here would call that unacceptable, especially given the winter weather that we've experienced.
Our hopes that those deliveries that have been due for a while will begin arriving as early as tomorrow, as the mayor's office put earlier, that those delayed shipments. This here in New York City, they brought their vaccination efforts practically to a standstill.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
SANDOVAL (voice over): Some hope today from the nation's top infectious disease expert, Dr. Anthony Fauci, told CNN's State of the Union, it's possible the country may start returning to normal by the end of this year. But until then, he says, mask wearing and social distancing measures are critical.
DANA BASH, CNN HOST: You're fully vaccinated. Are you seeing your family?
DR. ANTHONY FAUCI, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF ALLERGY AND INFECTIOUS DISEASES: Right now not yet. No yet. I mean, I would look forward to it within a reasonable period of time as the rest of my family gets vaccinated.
SANDOVAL: Fauci also insists that for now the U.S. is sticking with a two-dose schedule, backed up by data and clinical trials. This comes amid debate about delaying second doses to make more first doses available to the public.
The White House promises to make up for lost ground after winter weather delayed the delivery of about 6 million doses last week. New York's vaccine counter currently showing fewer than a thousand first doses remaining in the city.
JEN PSAKI, WHITE HOUSE PRESS SECRETARY: So we've been able to get about 2 million of those 6 million doses out. We expect to rapidly catch up this week, fill that backlog, make sure they're out to communities and also meet our deadlines and our timelines of the doses that are due to go out this upcoming week.
[18:20:00]
SANDOVAL: Despite delays, vaccines are still making it into arms at a rate of about 1.5 million a day nationally, even in parts of the country difficult to access by land. This V.A. clinic in rural Central Oregon became the first to fly in their vaccine doses, making them available to older veterans. And described as a massive vaxathon, this Philadelphia 24-hour vaccination clinic got more than 4,000 people there for a shot this weekend.
DR. ALA STANFORD, BLACK DOCTORS CONSORTIUM: They see this as potentially saving lives but also giving them their livelihood back.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: I have a husband. I have children and grandchildren. And I want to be around to be with them.
SANDOVAL: Expect global attention to once again focus on the origins of the virus.
JAKE SULLIVAN, WHITE HOUSE NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISER: We do not believe that China has made available sufficient original data into how this pandemic began to spread both in China and then eventually around the world. And we believe that both the WHO and China should step up on this matter.
SANDOVAL: Investigators tell CNN a preliminary report from the World Health Organization will soon be released. It's expected to call for extensive contact tracing of the first known COVID-19 patient back in late 2019. Investigators believe the patient was an office worker in his 40s from Wuhan, China.
Also key to the investigation, a closer look at supply chains in the Hunan seafood market that is thought to have played a role in the early stages of the pandemic before the virus started spreading in the United States.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
SANDOVAL (on camera): Another top prediction coming from Dr. Fauci earlier this morning too, Pam, he says that it is still possible that Americans may still have to wear their masks even into 2022. As you know, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention say that that is still one of the most effective ways at preventing transmission of COVID-19. So, really, yet another different kind of norm that many of us could expect possibly even next year.
BROWN: It certainly is. Polo Sandoval, thank you so much for bringing us the latest there.
And be sure to stay with us. In about 30 minutes, I'll speak to Dr. Ashish Jha to reflect on the death toll nearing the half a million mark and the timing debate over the second dose. Dr. Fauci still says to keep it a few weeks. Dr. Jha disagrees.
And, of course, I'll ask him about the mask, wearing the mask into next year. We'll be back.
[18:25:00]
BROWN: And we have some breaking news to report just coming in. The FAA has just issued an emergency air worthiness directive that will require immediate or stepped up inspections Boeing 777 equipped with Pratt & Whitney PW4000 engines.
CNN Aviation Correspondent Pete Muntean joins me now. So what is the significance of this, Pete?
PETE MUNTEAN, CNN AVIATION CORRESPONDENT: Well, Pamela, this all comes after yesterday's dramatic in-flight failure of the right engine on United Flight 328 as it left Denver International Airport. Investigators have really zeroed in on the particular engine, the Pratt & Whitney PW4000. And they're saying that inspections need to be stepped up because they found new information that says there were potentially problems with the aircraft's fan blades.
We just got the statement from FAA Administrator Steve Dixon. He says, we reviewed all available safety data following yesterday's incident. Based on the initial information, we concluded that the inspection interval should be stepped up for the hollow fan blades that are unique to this model of engine used solely on Boeing 777 airplanes. What this means is that some airplanes will be grounded.
This is an extreme measure by the FAA. They have not taken measures like this before with the 777. We know that 777s with this Pratt & Whitney PW4000 engine were also just banned from flying over Japan. That country's ministry of transportation said planes should not take off, land or even overfly Japan if they are Boeing 777 with this particular type of engine. So an extreme measure Boeing yesterday has (INAUDIBLE).
BROWN: Certainly, it sounds like it. All right, we'll see if more fallout comes. Pete Muntean, thank you so much.
And as president Biden passes the one-month mark in office, the White House is facing a big week for his agenda. Confirmation hearings are set to begin tomorrow for Biden's attorney general pick and a critical vote to come on his COVID relief bill.
CNN's Arlette Saenz is at the White House. So, Arlette, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi has said she wants the $1.9 trillion package ready for a vote this week. Is that realistic?
ARLETTE SAENZ, CNN WHITE HOUSE CORRESPONDENT: Well, it certainly seems like it will be heading towards that vote later in the week. And then once the COVID relief package is out of the House, it will move over to the Senate, where there is a bit more of an uphill climb to get this passed.
Now, the White House has said that President Biden will be laser- focused on COVID relief in the coming week. Both he and senior members of his team will continue their outreach to lawmakers up on Capitol Hill as they're trying to get this measure passed quickly.
The president said on Friday that he is willing to hear ideas about how to make this less expensive even as he's defended that $1.9 trillion COVID relief package. But so far, what the White House has indicated is that they are on track right now to pass this without Republican support. There really hasn't been any Republican in the Senate that has voiced support for this measure. So this is something that the White House will be keeping their eye on and working on ahead in this week.
And tonight, we are also learning how President Biden is planning to mark that moment when the nation crosses that 500,000 threshold for COVID deaths in the United States. I am told that the president is planning to deliver remarks and hold a candle lighting ceremony when that threshold is crossed, possibly as soon as Monday. The president has often talked about the need to remember these lives that have been lost due to COVID.
[18:30:04]
He held that ceremony over on the National Mall the day before his inauguration where he said that in order to heal, we must remember those who are lost -- Pamela.
BROWN: We absolutely must. Arlette Saenz, thank you for bringing us the latest there from the White House.
And meantime, new fault lines are being drawn in Washington, forcing both parties to grapple with intense internal divisions this week. For Democrats a bitter fight is playing out between progressives and moderates on key policies like a minimum wage increase and student loan forgiveness, threatening to halt President Biden's agenda.
And then on the GOP side, a host of high-ranking Republicans have made the pilgrimage to Donald Trump's Mar-a-Lago resort, while others vow to leave the former president behind.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
GOV. ASA HUTCHINSON (R), ARKANSAS: I would not support him for re- election in 2024. He's going to have a voice. But -- as former presidents do. But there's many voices in the party, and, again, he should not define our future.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
BROWN: Let's bring in CNN's senior political analyst and chief Washington correspondent for "Politico," Ryan Lizza. Also, former Trump Justice Department spokeswoman and staff writer at "The Dispatch," Sarah Isgur.
Great to see you both. Let's get right into it, Ryan. We are seeing these dramatic rifts in both parties simultaneously. How do you see this playing out?
RYAN LIZZA, CNN SENIOR POLITICAL ANALYST: Well, I think it's going to play out immediately on two fronts policy-wise over the next two weeks. One on personnel and one on a major Democratic policy. The personnel of course is Neera Tanden, the -- Biden's nominee to be director of OMB, a very important position, and she would be the first woman to hold that job and the first woman of color to hold that job.
And in a pretty dramatic development on Friday night, Joe Manchin, the Democratic senator from West Virginia, came out against her nomination. And that just might freeze all the Republicans against her. She needs the Republicans, it's a 50-50 Senate with the White House breaking the tie. And she needs to make up that vote. And so far over the weekend no Republican stepped forward to say, well, you know, Manchin might not like her but I'll vote for her. So a big split there.
And then on the next big policy issue is this minimum wage issue. The White House has indicated some retreat from including the minimum wage in the COVID relief bill. But two very important senators, Manchin again, who kind of controls the United States Senate these days, and Sinema from Arizona, have expressed opposition to a $15 federal minimum wage. That will probably make it through the House, but in the Senate it has a technical parliamentary obstacle it needs to overcome.
If it overcomes that, it then has the opposition of two senators, two Democratic senators, to face. So there is -- you know, there's some tension in the Democratic coalition right now on these two big issues.
BROWN: So challenges facing Joe Biden early on. And then you have the GOP, Sarah, this morning. The number two House Republican Steve Scalise dodged when asked whether Trump had any responsibility for the Capitol riot. Take a listen.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
REP. STEVE SCALISE (R-LA): Surely there's a lot of blame to go around. But at the end of the day, the people who stormed the Capitol on January 6th, it was a disgrace. And they need to be held accountable. President Trump has denounced what happened. And I think everybody should've been unequivocal in their denouncing of what happened.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
BROWN: So, Sarah, it has been more than a week since Mitch McConnell condemned Trump on the Senate floor. And it looks like, though, that that speech really hasn't moved the needle much.
SARAH ISGUR, FORMER TRUMP JUSTICE DEPARTMENT SPOKESWOMAN: The fights and the tension lines inside between the Republican Party have not diminished since the end of the impeachment hearing whatsoever. You know, and just before that interview clip that you showed, he also refused to say that the election had been fair, something that had been litigated in court case after court case after court case.
And I thought most fascinatingly there was a vote in the House that for those who thought that the election somehow was not fair, had been stolen from Donald Trump, that would mean that then of course the congressional elections hadn't been fair as well. And Steve Scalise declined to say that the congressional elections hadn't been fair, just the presidential elections. And so I think you see within the Republican Party those divides getting bigger, not smaller, over time and since Mitch McConnell gave that speech.
The profile of Nikki Haley in "Politico" magazine last week incredibly detailed tension that you saw with any single person of how you move forward as a potential 2024 candidate when you are tied to Donald Trump as the former head of that party.
[18:35:09]
Nikki Haley then came out and published an op-ed with the "Wall Street Journal" denouncing the "Politico" piece. But the tension remains. And so whether it's Steve Scalise, you know, leadership of the Republican Party, Nikki Haley, potential 2024, Mitch McConnell, the minority leader in the Senate, Mitt Romney who voted for impeachment, all of these people trying to live under the same big tent Republican name at this moment seems almost untenable that that could last until 2024. BROWN: But what is clear, Ryan, is that Trump still has a stranglehold in many ways over the GOP. What does that mean as you look ahead to 2022 and 2024, as Sarah laid out?
LIZZA: Yes, he does. And one thing, Pam, I think it's fair to point out, and I think Sarah will agree with me, but she can say so, we're talking about divides within these two parties. And I don't think these divides are equivalent. You know, we're talking about on the Democratic side, a debate over the minimum wage between different factions of the Democratic Party and a debate over whether, as we talked about before, one person is the right person for a job at OMB.
In the Republican Party, we are talking about a debate over whether you support the person who incited a violent mob to attack Congress. And I think -- I used that language intentionally and I think it's a fair description of what happened. So sometimes we get into these debates about the two parties. And, you know, I don't want people to come away with the idea that these are -- that there's some -- sometimes when we talk about this, it can seem like a false equivalence, and I think it's really important to point that out.
BROWN: Yes, and you're saying --
LIZZA: And to your question -- I think you're right. Trump is not going away. Many Republicans are scared of him. He has shown an ability to destroy the political reputations and careers of Republican candidates with nothing more than a tweet. Now he doesn't have Twitter right now, but he's got the ability to communicate. And that divide, that war is going to be with us for quite a long time.
BROWN: And it's almost like when Steve Scalise was on this morning, it's like he was choosing his words to not piss off Trump, I mean, is essentially what the vibe you're getting. I'm glad you brought up the fact check. We also have a fact check on what Steve Scalise said on the election coming up in the show.
Sarah Isgur, Ryan Lizza, thank you so much.
LIZZA: Thanks, Pam.
BROWN: And adding insult to injury, many Texans are getting hit with eye-popping utility bills after the winter storm left so many people without power for so long. A live report from Houston up next.
[18:42:02]
BROWN: Well, the state of Texas is beginning to thaw after the major winter storm there. But a recovery from the power crisis is far from over.
CNN's Natasha Chen joins me now from Houston.
So what is the situation like on the ground there, Natasha? NATASHA CHEN, CNN NATIONAL CORRESPONDENT: Yes, Pamela, just a few hours ago this lot we're standing in was filled with cars. This event just wrapped up. A mass distribution event, 3600 meals delivered, pallets and pallets of bottled water. Now even though Houston's boiled water notice has been lifted along with 145 other boil water notices this weekend, bottled water may still really be necessary as millions of Texans are still experiencing disruptions in water service.
And people have busted pipes at home. That includes the volunteers who came today. They told me about their busted pipes. But they still came out to help their fellow neighbors who are facing the same challenges.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
RACHEL STEVENS, AUSTIN, TEXAS RESIDENT: So we lost power on Sunday night and we got it back Wednesday. Things have defrosted enough that we are able to get in and check out stuff. And we had lines that were just gushing water. So now we've got zero water in the house just due to having to turn it off until somebody can come out here to start fixing things.
CHEN (voice-over): Rachel Stevens was without power and water for days. Now her family is left to clean up the damage left behind from frozen pipes, conditions found across much of the state.
MAYOR SYLVESTER TURNER (D), HOUSTON: Right now with so many homes across the city having pipes that burst because of the frigid weather and major leaks, major water damage, we need a lot of plumbing materials and supplies like right now.
CHEN: In the meantime, Texas officials are investigating the massive bills some customers who pay variable rates for their energy are now facing.
DEANDRE UPSHAW, DALLAS RESIDENT: I'm trying to get, you know, gas and groceries and make sure that my pipes aren't exploding. The last thing that I'm thinking about is a $7,000 bill for my utility.
TURNER: All of this was foreseeable. I wrote about it in 2011. And so for these exorbitant costs, it's not the consumers who should assume that costs. They are not at fault for what happened this week.
UNIDENTIFIED REPORTER: Well, who should then?
TURNER: The bill should go to the state of Texas.
CHEN: Calls for accountability are also coming from the other side of the aisle.
WILL HURD (R), FORMER TEXAS REPRESENTATIVE: This was preventable. This wasn't a problem with any individual fuel source. This was a problem of lack of leadership and lack of long-term planning.
DOLORES LOZANO, HOUSTON RESIDENT: We all have a voice, and we all need to use it accordingly because there's a lot of people in leadership that are just really just chilling in Cancun. CHEN: Also this weekend embattled Texas Senator Ted Cruz is tweeting pictures of himself handing out bottled water to residents. Cruz has been under fire after he was spotted jetting to Cancun with his family while many Texans suffered through the storm.
REP. MICHAEL MCCAUL (R), TEXAS: Look, when a crisis hits my state, I'm there. I'm not going to go on some vacation. I know Mr. Cruz called it a mistake and he's owned up to that. But I think that was a big mistake.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
[18:45:06]
CHEN: And the state leaders are now turning their attention to those enormous energy bills. The Texas governor said today that the public utility commission in the state called an emergency meeting to issue a moratorium on disconnection of service due to nonpayment and also to restrict electric providers from sending invoices at this time. He said that would allow time to address those skyrocketing energy bills -- Pamela.
BROWN: All right, Natasha Chen live for us from Houston, thank you.
And the U.S. is closing in on half a million American lives lost to coronavirus. And health officials are stressing the importance of vaccinations. Dr. Ashish Jha joins us to talk about what's next. We'll be back.
[18:50:13]
BROWN: And we have some breaking news just coming in. United is now grounding some planes. I want to go straight to Pete Muntean with the very latest.
What are you learning, Pete?
PETE MUNTEAN, CNN AVIATION CORRESPONDENT: Well, Pamela, this is all after yesterday's dramatic inflight failure of the right engine on United Airlines Flight 328. And United Airlines now says it is voluntarily grounding 24 Boeing 777s like those in yesterday's incident carrying the Pratt and Whitney PW4000 engine. This is just after a statement earlier in the hour where the FAA says it was mandating updated inspections, more stepped up inspections of the PW4000 engine after it found issues with the jet's fan blade.
You could see that jet engine there on fire in yesterday's incident. This is so significant because the FAA rarely ever takes emergency action like this. And it says that this will lead to the grounding of some airplanes at least temporarily. And United is following suit saying they're doing this on their own beyond just the FAA's emergency order asking for more inspections. United Airlines is saying it's grounding these airplanes at least for now on its own.
BROWN: So just for context, Pete, do we expect other airlines to do the same that have this Pratt and Whitney engine?
MUNTEAN: Well, the PW4000 is a type of engine that's used across airlines, across multiple different airplanes. The Boeing 747, the Airbus A330. I'm told that the PW4000 engine used in the 777-200 in this incident in particular uses a certain kind of hollow titanium blade that is particularly hard to inspect. That is why there is an abundance of caution here not only from regulators but also from airlines.
BROWN: All right, Pete Muntean. Thanks for bringing us the breaking news. We'll keep checking back with you as you learn more.
Well, imagine that the entire population of Atlanta or Kansas City or Sacramento just vanished. Each of those cities with roughly 500,000 residents would equal America's COVID-19 losses so far. Since the first reported U.S. coronavirus death on February 6th of last year we have lost nearly a half million people in this country alone. Far more than any other nation.
Joining me now with more is Dr. Ashish Jha, the dean of Brown University School of Public Health.
Dr. Jha, thanks for coming on. When this pandemic started about a year ago, would you have predicted such a stunning loss of life here in the U.S.?
DR. ASHISH JHA, DEAN, BROWN UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF PUBLIC HEALTH: Pamela, thank you for having me on. Not only would I not have, I did not. I thought we were going to do much better. We have a very good public health agency, we have a lot of capability. I did think some Americans were going to end up getting sick and dying, but I did not imagine anything this awful. It's really sort of unimaginable.
BROWN: Given the downward trend we're seeing in the numbers finally now, would you say it's possible that this is the beginning of the end?
JHA: Yes, I'm very hopeful about where we are. Now we have a couple of road bumps ahead, those variants that we've been hearing about continue to concern me. I'm hoping they won't be big bumps, but no doubt about it, I can see the end zone here. And it's -- it's not that far away. I think by the time we get into the summer certainly by the fall life will be meaningfully better.
BROWN: Do you agree with Dr. Fauci that we could be wearing masks into next year?
JHA: Well, I think -- you know, I didn't hear the specific comment that Dr. Fauci made about the context. I can imagine certain situations in which we will be wearing masks. So I think all of us are going to be wearing masks all the time the way we are right now, all the way to 2022, I don't. But I can imagine in high risk situations, large indoor gatherings there may still be some mask wearing that goes on and it's going to be necessary.
BROWN: So let's talk really quickly about herd immunity. There's sort of this race to reach herd immunity with the vaccine, but there's still a lot of hesitation. If it's not reached relatively soon and this virus keeps mutating what does that mean? What will that do?
JHA: Yes, we absolutely need to get as many people vaccinated as possible for exactly that reason, to suppress the virus. The more we can suppress it, the fewer mutations it has. So I'm optimistic we're going to get there, Pamela, but it's going to really take a lot of effort to make sure everybody gets vaccinated.
BROWN: And very quickly, are you -- where are you in terms of one vaccine versus the two vaccines? We heard Dr. Fauci earlier today say no, we need to stick with the two vaccines. But other studies have come out, Israel and Canada that have said they saw a lot of protection after just one.
JHA: Yes, there's clearly very good protection after one. I think everybody needs two shots, no doubt about it. What I have been arguing for others as well is that it's probably OK to delay the second dose a little bit in order to get a lot more people their first dose. I'm worried about the variants. I want as many high risk people with their first dose as quickly as possible.
BROWN: OK, Dr. Ashish Jha, thank you for bringing us the latest and all of your expertise. We appreciate it.
JHA: Thank you.
BROWN: Well, after the engine failure on a United flight out of Denver yesterday, the FAA is now requiring new inspections of Boeing 777s with Pratt and Whitney engines, and warns that some could be removed from service. Details on that up next.
Load-Date: February 22, 2021



End of Document


POLITICSNATION WITH AL SHARPTON for February 21, 2021
MSNBC POLITICS NATION 5:00 PM EST
February 21, 2021 Sunday

Copyright 2021  ASC Services II Media, LLC
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2021 MSNBC
Section: NEWS; Domestic
Length: 6611 words
Byline: Al Sharpton, Michelle Goldberg, Richard Lui, Alicia Menendez
Guests: Ayanna Pressley, Lori Lightfoot, Tim Miller, Stacey Holman, Ira Rosen
Highlight: Representative Pressley is interviewed on federal job guarantee for all Americans and the push for Biden administration to cancel student loan debt. Lawmakers call for centralized state vaccine sign-up system. Texas governor places blame for power grid failure on wind turbines. Beto O`Rourke organizes wellness checks in Texas. Senator Ted Cruz flies to Cancun in the middle of Texas storm crisis. Texas faces dire need as food and water shortages carry on. Texas households` energy bills skyrocket amid massive power outages. FAA launches investigation into United Flight 328`s engine failure. PBS docuseries details history and struggles of black Americans. New book takes reader behind the scenes of 60 MINUTES.
Body




AL SHARPTON, MSNBC HOST: Good evening and welcome to POLITICSNATION.
Tonight, I start with a big announcement. In honor of black history month, this week, I will travel to Washington, D.C., to conduct an exclusive interview with the first black vice president of the United States, Kamala Harris. It will be her first interview in the ceremonial office at the White House. And you will be able to watch it next Saturday right here on POLITICSNATION.
It was two years ago today when I spent time with the then-senator and presidential candidate, Kamala Harris, north of the studio at Harlem`s famous Silvia`s Restaurant. And so this week`s interview will bring it a full circle. So stay tuned. Next Saturday, 5:00 P.M. Eastern on POLITICSNATION, right here on MSNBC.
And now, to tonight`s lead, the new normal, one third of President Biden`s first 100 days have already gone by, and to his credit, the president has met the moment, albeit not without brewing fights within his own party over the scale and scope of his proposed solutions.
As the nation mourns the breaking news that more than half a million Americans have died from COVID as of today, the president is ramping up his ambitious vaccination efforts and paying attention to the growing racial disparities in the vaccine`s distribution.
In a bit, I`ll talk to Chicago Mayor Lori Lightfoot about how her city is getting the vaccine to black and brown residents who need it most.
But back to politics first, because as President Biden pushes forward on COVID, he`s already pulled back from more ambitious offerings on raising the minimum wage and reducing student debt, drawing criticism from progressive Democrats in Congress who say, this is the time for full force, not half measures.
Joining me now is Congresswoman Ayanna Pressley, Democrat of Massachusetts. Congresswoman Pressley, thank you for being with us this evening.
Let me start with this, you have introduced the house resolution this week that essentially calls on the federal government to guarantee every American a job. I would imagine it`s designed to address the present damage of COVID, but it`s not an entirely new idea. We both know it has a history among black economists and civil rights leaders going back at least a half a century. What does your resolution propose, and why now, Congresswoman, as we`re in the grips of what we`re in?
REP. AYANNA PRESSLEY (D-MA): Well, thank you, Rev, for providing that important historical contextualizing. And I want to speak their names, from Sadie Alexander, the first black woman to earn a PhD in Economics, to Bayard Rustin, to Dr. King, to Coretta Scott King. You know, as you remind us, having brought us all back for a second march on Washington, it was always about a march for jobs and freedom, for economic justice.
Dr. King spoke about the three evils, economic exploitation, poverty, racism, and militarism, and said that as long as you have one, you will have the other. Coretta Scott King spoke about the need to alleviate human suffering.
A federal job guarantee guards against economic exploitation and allows each person their dignity and their humanity to be affirmed in every adult who seeks full employment, having an opportunity for a public job that would be legally enforceable and funded by the federal government. And that would affirm living wages, decent working conditions, health care, and I think within the context of talking about building back better, and having a just and equitable economic recovery, in talking about climate justice goals, racial justice goals, economic justice goals, that a federal job guarantee should be a part of that solution in thinking big.
And finally, Rev, we have been here before. We know under FDR, programs like the WPA and the civilian conservation corps were very successful, but they were not sustainable.
SHARPTON: And you mentioned the second march we had last year that you spoke at. And you spoke around these things there. It amazes me how people talk about Martin Luther King in such great esteem and then don`t deal with the economic program him and Mrs. King and Bayard Rustin, and others advocated, which your resolution capitalized at this time in the middle of a pandemic. I mean, they were advocating that when we didn`t even have the kinds of things that have exacerbated the problem.
And let me raise this, black women are the most educated demographic in America. They also carried the heaviest proportion of student debt in the nation. You have been out front on this issue. Student debt, student loan debt, and last month, you tweeted, quote, to thank black women, cancel student debt, all of it.
On Friday, 17 state attorney generals led by your A.G., Maura Healey, in Massachusetts, and Tish James here in New York, sent a letter to Congress calling on President Biden to forgive up to $50,000 in student debt per borrower. But three days before the president said bluntly that he would not do that, in part, it could apply to high earners from Ivy League schools as well.
Of course, many progressives are not happy with that logic or that decision. I would like to hear your thoughts on the disconnect, Congresswoman.
PRESSLEY: Rev, you know, my eyes were failing me, so I`m not sure which tweet you pulled up, but I have also tweeted, when it comes to thanking black voters and thanking black women to save your words of appreciation, policy is our love language. And canceling student debt is an economic justice issue, it is a racial justice issue and it must be a part of a just and equitable economic recovery from this pandemic. This is a nearly $2 trillion crisis.
And so the narrative that President Biden was pushing in that town hall is a misleading characterization. And I`m glad that his press secretary walked back what he said at that town hall. First of all, he does have the authority. Congress gave him that under the Higher Education Act. So he absolutely has the authority by way of executive action to cancel $50,000 worth of debt.
And who stands to benefit from that? 80 percent of the lowest income households stand to benefit from that. 40 percent of households who have student loan debt but never even earned a degree, those who have been preyed upon by the deceptive business practices and predatory lending of for-profit colleges and universities. And black student borrowers, Rev, 85 percent of us have no choice but to take out loans. And then we are five times more likely to default on those loans than our white counterparts.
SHARPTON: Well, you have said that you defaulted yourself. I mean, you have used yourself as an example in a very open and, I think, courageous way.
PRESSLEY: Well, you know, I`m no anomaly, you know? Again, 85 percent of black students have no choice but to borrow because of policies like redlining, which obstructed our family`s abilities to build generational wealth. I grew up in a single female parented household, and I had no choice. And then I defaulted. And, again, we`re five times more likely to default than our white counterparts.
So President Biden must cancel student debt by executive action. $50,000 will go a long way in a just recovery from this pandemic, but also on realizing those expressed racial justice goals given the disparate impact of financial burden for black student borrowers.
But, again, Rev, this is a $2 trillion crisis, okay? So I`m talking about educators in my district who lost their licensure to teach because they defaulted on loans they incurred in order to be educators. I`m talking about people in my district, 76 years old, Rev, still paying on student loans. The fastest growing population of student loan debtors are 50-plus.
SHARPTON: Yes, that`s right.
PRESSLEY: So, it`s not even just a Millennial or Gen Z issue.
SHARPTON: Let me -- I`m out of time, but I have to bring this up with you. Briefly on Thursday, the web portal for vaccine appointments in your state crashed after more than 1 million additional Massachusetts residents became eligible at the same time. You and other Massachusetts Democrats have pointed out racial disparities already present in the vaccine has been administered in the way it has been administered in your state with data suggesting that white residents are several times more likely to be vaccinated than black and brown ones. Briefly, what can be done to fix this?
PRESSLEY: Yes, well, again, every inequity has been laid bare and exacerbated in this pandemic. And that`s why early on I was calling for the collection of equitable data to directly inform our response. More recently, I called for the anonymized collection of racial demographic data when it comes to vaccine recipients.
But that response, systems crashing is unacceptable. Everyone needs to be able to get the vaccine and to get it quickly to stop the spread of this virus, especially with new variants emerging. This is about saving lives. And what we`re seeing trending is vaccine redlining. And so one way that we get at that, the chief way we get at that is to ensure equitable access.
So what we`re proposing is that there be a system whereby people can preregister and they`ll receive notification when their slot comes up. And there`s availability for them in proximity.
SHARPTON: All right. Thank you for being with us this evening, Congresswoman Ayanna Pressley.
PRESSLEY: Thank you, Rev.
SHARPTON: Moving now to talk about new strategies to overcome vaccine hesitancy in the black and Latin X communities, joining me now is Chicago Mayor Lori Lightfoot.
Madam Mayor, following early reports that black and brown Chicagoans were being left behind in the COVID vaccination process, you were able to announce improvements this week. You called that new approach equity-based. What does that look like on the ground?
MAYOR LORI LIGHTFOOT (D), CHICAGO, IL: Well, what it looks like is being - - putting equity at the center of your vaccine distribution and being systematically intentional about going into black and brown neighborhoods with trusted community partners, spreading the word about why the vaccine is safe, using local trusted partners as themselves, the people who get the vaccine, and letting them spread the gospel.
We have been going door-to-door in black and brown Chicago talking about the vaccine months before we even got it. We built these tables at the start of the pandemic and we have been very, very fortunate to have great partners on the ground in neighborhoods across the city that have been most hard hit by COVID-19. And that hard work of going door-to-door, holding community meetings, educating the people about the virus, about the vaccine, bringing them into care, is now finally bearing fruit.
We started out vaccine distributions with under 20 percent of black and brown Chicago getting the vaccine. We now have in recent weeks have been over 50 percent. That`s a remarkable turnaround but that`s because of all of the hard work of so many people across our city. You have got to put equity first, and you have to be intentional and unapologetic about it.
SHARPTON: And intentional along with those trusted representatives in the community that you`re saying that helped you turn these numbers around in a very important way.
Now, the issue of vaccine inequity has been a nationwide problem with just over 6 percent of shots so far going to black folks. What unique challenges are you facing in Chicago and what advice do you have for other mayors?
LIGHTFOOT: Well, first of all, we`ve got to improve the number of vaccines that we`re getting every week, and I know that the Biden administration is hard at work on that. They walked into a disastrous situation, particularly that there wasn`t any COVID stockpile. That`s -- their vaccine stockpile. That`s a significant problem.
But, really, there`s no secret sauce other than making sure that you put equity first, you follow the data, you understand where the challenges are, and you build those tables at the grassroots level. That`s the way you do it. You know this from your own experience. It`s community organizing 101, but in the middle of a pandemic, you have got to win people`s trust. That`s the only way you get there, and you have got to focus every single day on building those bridges and partnerships at the community level.
SHARPTON: Now, given that this pandemic has disproportionately impacted black and brown communities, what is your approach to vaccine hesitancy? Do you think your choice to be vaccinated publicly will help in that area?
LIGHTFOOT: Well, I sure hope so. I wanted to make sure that I showed people that I was taking the vaccine myself. I talk a lot about my family members, my 92-year-old mother, because I want people to see somebody who looks like them in the same circumstances, telling them that the vaccine is safe. But, really, it`s about getting those people in the neighborhoods vaccinated. When they are vaccinated, when they feel comfortable, they see their neighbors, we`re starting to see people come off the wall and get the vaccine.
I was in a neighborhood of mostly Latin X, but some black folks, just on Friday when I got my second shot. And we were in a vaccination site, and the entire time we were there, people were coming in. And what we have done, we call it protect Chicago Plus. We`re going into the 15 hardest hit neighborhoods in our city, which are black and brown, we`re breaking down barriers.
It doesn`t matter what age you are, it doesn`t matter what occupation you are. We want to get those people in those neighborhoods vaccinated because the data tells us that if we get people in the hardest hit neighborhoods vaccinated, we`re going to stop the spread. And that`s what this is about, saving lives, stopping the spread of the virus, and bringing those people that are most vulnerable into care through the vaccine.
SHARPTON: And then I think that is the bottom line. We can differ on a lot of things, but saving lives should be something that everyone can unite around and handle our differences and our different views at another point. Thank you very much for being with us this evening, Chicago Mayor Lori Lightfoot.
LIGHTFOOT: Thank you, Rev. And I appreciate it always.
SHARPTON: From Chicago to Texas, I want to bring my panel in. Michelle Goldberg, Columnist at The New York Times, and an MSNBC Contributor, and Tim Miller, Writer-at-Large for The Bulwark.
Tim, let me start with you. Despite the fact that only a fifth of Texas energy is generated from renewables, the Republican power structure up to and including the governor has been trying to blame grid failures on green energy, like wind turbines. And, I mean, will Texas voters hold them accountable for this deception and for their years of ignoring the real problems?
TIM MILLER, WRITER-AT-LARGE, THE BULWARK: Well, you know, it`s possible Rev. And, look, Texas has been getting bluer and bluer. I think you look at the Houston metro, for example. You`re seeing a lot of Democrats in the Congressional seats around there and local government. So, you know, look, I think so.
If you take what Ted Cruz has been saying, you know, over the past five years, and same with Greg Abbott, they have taken every opportunity to brag about the deregulation they did of the energy industry in Texas. They have been dunking on California any time that they have had the opportunity. And California has given them a couple good opportunities.
And now, you know, that Texans are freezing, now that they are being surprised with thousands and thousands of dollars in heating bills that many of them can`t afford, you know, you`re seeing them trying to either, A, point at the Democrats, like Greg Abbott did on Fox News, saying this was AOC`s fault in a state that is run by Republicans, or Ted Cruz trying to backtrack and say, this is unacceptable. We now we do need regulation.
And so, you know look, I think that you can see that they have boxed themselves into corners. Texas is still very much a red state, so I wouldn`t expect it to change overnight, but I would expect Ted Cruz and Greg Abbott`s numbers to go down as we monitor them in the coming weeks.
SHARPTON: Michelle, following the weather emergency in Texas this week, former Senator and Presidential Candidate Beto O`Rourke organized hundreds of thousands of wellness checks in the state. He came close to unseating Ted Cruz in 2018. So what would his chances of -- would they improve, let`s say, if he decided to challenge Republican Governor Greg Abbott in 2022, in your opinion?
MICHELLE GOLDBERG, MSNBC CONTRIBUTOR: Well, look, I think what Beto did is the strongest possible rejoinder to people who said, well, really, what could Ted Cruz do if he had stuck around, right? What`s the big deal if he goes off to Cancun? Beto, who has no government job, no public role, is out there doing what a representative of Texas should do.
You know, look, I think Texas continues to break Democratic hearts. You know, people keep thinking that it`s on the verge of becoming a blue or a purple state and it doesn`t happen. But the lesson of a state like Georgia is it doesn`t happen and it doesn`t happen, and it doesn`t happen until it does.
And so whether or not it`s going to be Beto, you know, if you have the right people out there organizing all of the people who have, you know, suffered and been through kind of hell and lost homes and lives and livelihoods this past week, it can be done but it`s not going to happen by itself.
SHARPTON: Now, Tim, Ted Cruz is under fire, Michelle alluded to it, under fire this week for flying to Cancun in the middle of a crisis. Was he already famously one of the most despised people in Washington? I mean, even within his own party, was Cruz`s Mexico trip the final nail in the coffin for his larger political ambitions?
MILLER: Yes. Unfortunately, I think he`s Dracula, Al. I don`t think that we`ve got nails in the coffin quite yet. I think that there was hope that maybe trying to overturn the election a couple weeks ago would have been the nails in his coffin, and now going to Mexico is. He`s not on the ballot for a while. I don`t think that his aspirations of the higher office and the presidency or something that`s ever going to happen for him, but he`s going to be a survivor in the Senate seat.
And I think that in order to get rid of him, I think, to Michelle`s point, you know Democrats have going to win over some traditional Republican voters. You know, Texas is still going to be a red state. You need to up the turnout, do the organizing that Beto is doing, and win over traditional Republican voters who don`t really like Ted Cruz that much.
So there is a potential opportunity there, but, you know, he`s -- we`re stuck with him for a little while.
SHARPTON: Michelle, as you just said, I want to come back to it, it seems like every election cycle, we hear that this could be the year Texas finally turns blue or purple. But as the state`s demographics shift and they seem to shift in that direction, the state has been passing voter suppression initiatives. Will this crisis be the thing that finally convinces a critical mass of Texans that the GOP does not have their interests at heart?
GOLDBERG: You know, I don`t think we know, and partly we don`t know because we don`t know who the candidates are going to be in two years and in four years. I mean, one of the hard lessons of the last election is that demographics aren`t destiny, right? Democrats can`t just count on the growing nonwhite share of the population to carry them over the finish line when plenty of immigrant communities are quite socially conservative and have been won over. As we know, Donald Trump actually made gains in the border communities of Texas.
And so you know, again, Democrats can`t count on Texas just becoming purple by nature of the demographics. They have to go out and they have to organize those communities and really make a case connecting the immiseration in people`s lives to policies championed by these Republican politicians.
SHARPTON: All right, I have to leave it there, Michelle Goldberg and Tim Miller, thank you both for joining us this evening.
Coming up, Trump used to call him Lying Ted but now he`s Flying Ted. Senator Cruz is under fire yet again this time for leaving his state cold, in a crisis.
But, first, my colleague, Richard Lui, with today`s other top news stories. Richard?
RICHARD LUI, MSNBC HOST: Rev, a good Sunday to you.
Some of the stories we`re watching for you this hour, a grim milestone to report this afternoon. Half a million people have now died from COVID-19 in the United States. That`s more than any American war since the Civil War. Confirmed cases nationwide now over 28 million.
Food and water shortages in Texas continue in the wake of this week`s massive winter storm. Millions are still under a boil water notice while grocery store shelves, they remain bare. Some Texans now face massive energy bills as widespread power outages create price spikes. The governor announced today to stop customer disconnections for nonpayment during the crisis.
And the FAA has launched an investigation into what caused a United Airlines plane`s engine to fail shortly after takeoff Saturday. The audio from the cockpit reveals the pilot called mayday as one of the engines exploded and caught fire, you see here. The plane made an emergency landing safely at Denver International Airport. Debris from the Boeing 777 rained down on the Denver metro area, striking several places, including the front yard of a home. 231 passengers and 10 crew members were onboard. No injuries reported.
More POLITICS NATION with Reverend Al Sharpton right after the break.
SHARPTON: For this week`s Gotcha, I want to discuss the Junior Senator from Texas, Ted Cruz, who this week left his state in the middle of a crisis to go to a resort in Cancun. This while millions of his constituents were left freezing without power or water due to a severe winter weather.
When his getaway sparked outrage across the country, Senator Cruz responded by throwing his own daughters under the bus.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX): Well, Texas is going through horrific storms. And millions of Texans have lost power, lost heat and have been hurt. And our family was among them. We had no heat and no power. And yesterday, my daughters asked if they could take a trip with some friends. And Heidi and I agreed so I flew down with them last night, dropped them off here, and now I`m headed back to Texas. And back to continuing to work to try to get the power on. What`s happening in Texas is unacceptable and a lot of Texans are hurting.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
SHARPTON: Almost no one has come to the defense of Ted Cruz, not even his own Republican colleagues who, in the past, have had this to say about the senator.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM (R-SC): If you kill Ted Cruz on the floor of the Senate and the trial was in the Senate, nobody could convict you.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
SHARPTON: But don`t be fooled. This story is bigger than Ted Cruz. Another Republican, the mayor of a small town in West Texas, had to resign this week after telling his residents to stop whining about the cold and power outages, suggesting only the strong would survive.
The same attitude prevailed up and down Texas state government, which is controlled by Republicans at every level. Texans were warned a full decade ago about its power grid could not withstand severe weather like we`re seeing this week. And Republicans ignored the warning, kicking the can down the road in favor of deregulation and ever growing oil profits.
The state`s so-called leaders, including Governor Greg Abbott, have been blaming renewable energy for the crisis, even though the state runs primarily on fossil fuels. And this dereliction is hardly new. Texas Republican leaders have been mocking other states for their natural disasters for years. Their favorite scapegoats include a second term congresswoman from Queens and a Green New Deal that doesn`t exist yet anywhere in the country.
But it turns out the joke was on them. Representative Alexandria Ocasio- Cortez actually was involved in this crisis, doing the hard work Republicans wouldn`t do. While Senator Cruz was dropping off his family at the Ritz Carlton in Cancun, the New York congresswoman raised over $3 million for relief efforts in the Lone Star State.
So to Senator Cruz and his fellow sink or swim Republicans in Texas, let me say this, the time for hypocrisy and victim blaming is over. You have spent years ridiculing the idea that government can help and protect people even as you have seized the levers of power to enrich yourselves. And now, even in the middle of rolling blackouts, millions of Texans and hundreds of millions of Americans can see the light and connect the dots. Texans are smart enough to know who has abandoned them in their time of need. And in the next election cycle, they will abandon you at the ballot box.
I gotcha.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
SHARPTON: I know how this story is going to end. The first will be last. The last will be first. Justice is going to come. Justice is going to come. Justice is going to come.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
SHARPTON: It`s black history month Sunday here on POLITICSNATION. And tonight, we pivot from celebrating a person or a group to an institution, because the church has been the nerve center of black America since the nation`s founding, producing many of our leaders and providing cover of every kind from the storms of slavery, Jim Crow and the violence of the civil rights era.
This week, PBS premiered its brilliant four-part documentary, The Black Church, This Is Our Story, This is Our Song. And because I spent a little bit of time in the pulpit myself, I was honored to say a few words for it, as you have just seen.
Joining me now is Stacey L. Holman, Director and Producer of the Black Church, This Is Our Story, This Is Our Song. Ms. Holman, can you tell us what brought you to this project and why now this story about black faith throughout history?
STACEY L. HOLMAN, PRODUCER AND DIRECTOR, THE BLACK CHURCH, THIS IS OUR STORY, THIS IS OUR SONG: Hi, Reverend Al, so great to see you again. And this came through Dr. Henry Louis Gates. He grew up in a black church or in a predominantly black church, and this story was quite dear to him. And when I became a part of the series, I just got an off of producing, directing hour three of reconstruction, and I just really was -- my history growing up in the black church really seemed like it was a perfect fit.
And because this was a personal story, because that both us had a history in the black church, we felt that, you know, it was important for us to really share this experience, to really tell the story, which is not just about the black church. It`s American history. And the timing is always perfect to talk about the black church.
SHARPTON: Now, as I mentioned before, the church has always played a dual role, acting as a house of worship while at the same time organizing black communities politically. I don`t think it`s fully appreciated just how many of our leaders, men and women, have come out of the church from Denmark Vesey to Dr. King to Paul Merit (ph) and now Senator Raphael, Adam Clayton Powell and today, people continue, Bill Gray, I mean, and our civil rights leaders from Dr. King on to ministers that use the pulpit now, W. Franklin Richardson, Reverend Freddie Haynes. I mean, the list goes on and on, and I know part of your difficulty was getting everybody in just four hours.
HOLMAN: Oh, I mean, it was an ambitious project. And this is just the tip of the iceberg. I mean, what we want to create is not just only tell just the breadth of a story but start a conversation about the black church. The people can dig in deeper. They can learn more about Denmark Vesey. They can learn about the women who were incredible influences and important to the infrastructure of the black church.
So we just encourage people just to continue to dig and to search and to learn more about this institution. 400 years in four hours, there`s no way, very ambitious.
SHARPTON: Now, let me ask you this. My mentor brought me into civil rights at 12, Dr. William Augustus Jones. He used to always say, Al, the black church can do things because of its independence. It is supported by its parishioners, so nobody can call us and tell us what to do or not do because we are self-sufficient.
Do you think people really understand that is why black education in terms of colleges and black economic institutions, black banks, black businesses, all of that can start in the black church, because it was its own boss and no one could stop them, as Dr. Jones would say, they can`t cut us off because they didn`t cut us on?
HOLMAN: Yes, I agree. I mean, I think it`s the agency. It`s black agency. That`s what the black church has been an example of. And I think today people may not recognize that. And that`s why the series is so important at this time at this moment.
And if you even look at history, if you look at the attacks on African- Americans, where has it happened a lot, in the black church. They know once they hit that, once they target that, they know that they`re really hitting a nerve. So I hope that a younger generation, a millennial generation is really seeing just how this institution is still relevant, and the importance of it and how we can learn from it.
SHARPTON: One of the things that I liked also is that you showed a lot of the younger generations that listened to Kirk Franklin and others because I think there`s a misperception that all of the young people of today have left the church, and that`s not true. I think that a lot of our churches, if I look around the country from a Rudy McKissick to a Jamal Bryant to others are drawing more young people on a consistent basis than some of our rock artists but it`s a hidden secret until now you come out and expose it. The black church is still the largest gathering place of blacks on a weekly basis in the United States.
HOLMAN: It is, and it`s always been the center of anything. If you want to get a group of people, where do you go? You go to church. And it will always be that center of attention and always be that place, a gathering space, regardless. And even, I look at Tracy Blackman --
SHARPTON: Right.
HOLMAN: Reverend Tracy Blackman, who talks about even Black Lives Matter. She said they didn`t leave the church. Black Lives Matter was church.
So we have to realize the church is not confined in four walls. The church is -- what`s happened at Hush Harbors in the 1700s. So we will have church wherever we gather.
SHARPTON: And there are different phases, different it`s always been different denominations, different styles. Some pastors, some don`t, some are LGBTQ, some are Pentecostal, some don`t pass into civil rights work. You covered that well, like what I do. We`re not monolithic, but we`re clear that that has been the independent base and remains that until this day. I thought it was important that we capture that and show it to the world.
Stacey L. Holman, we thank you for your time this evening.
HOLMAN: Thank you.
SHARPTON: Coming up, a shocking look behind the scenes of one of the most iconic T.V. news magazines. A former 60 MINUTES producer talks about America`s changing newsrooms, next.
SHARPTON: For over half a century, Americans have tuned in every Sunday to watch 60 MINUTES. The groundbreaking show set the standard for T.V. journalism and helped raise the profiles of pioneering African-American and female reporters, such as Ed Bradley and Leslie Stahl.
But behind the scenes, the picture was different. In a new book, one former producer describes the culture as discriminatory and abusive.
Joining me now is former 60 MINUTES Producer Ira Rosen. He is the Author of Ticking Clock, Behind the Scenes at 60 MINUTES. Ira Rosen, thank you for being with us. And, Ira, please our audience briefly what the book is about and also how I`m a part of it, let`s have full disclosure, because I want to get into other areas.
IRA ROSEN, FORMER PRODUCER, 60 MINUTES: Absolutely. I mean, the book is a producer`s perspective of putting together the show. And the producer is underappreciated in a lot of what we do. And what I try to do is tell stories about what the producer`s roles in putting the stories together.
Certainly, you and I had done a story once before where I produced a story, which Leslie Stahl did with you, and you know how hard we work and what we do behind the scenes to make that happen.
SHARPTON: Right. Now, what is the impact of having more people of color and women both in front of the camera and behind it on all news shows and newsrooms, and especially on shows like 60 MINUTES?
ROSEN: No, you`re exactly right, it has a huge impact. 60 Minutes in 53 years has had only two black correspondents, Ed Bradley and the great Bill Whittaker, who I was fortunate enough to work with. They have only -- they currently only have one black producer full-time on the broadcast.
And as great a show as it is, you know, we learn from each other and they need to do better. They have had no Asian correspondents on that broadcast in 53 years. They have had no Hispanic correspondents on the broadcast in that period of time.
I have learned enormous amount working with Bill Whittaker. He has made me a better journalist through his stories. I mean, you may not know this, for example, Bill Whittaker`s dad worked in the old white establishment, the Cotton Club. And he worked at a time there as a waiter when he couldn`t even be a patron in the place. His mother was waiting for him in the kitchen, playing cards with Ella Fitzgerald.
I mean, this was something that me as a white kid growing up in Queens had no idea about. Together, you know, we shared our cultural experiences. And we elevated the broadcast. And 60 MINUTES I think could do -- you know, Rev, 60 MINUTES could do better in that regard. It would make it a much better broadcast.
SHARPTON: And you`ve shared some of the stories with me about Whittaker on when we have talked. And but you have it all in the book. You worked as a producer on 60 MINUTES for decades. A number of that had -- a number of female and black T.V. journalists that were trail blazers in the industry that were still predominantly white. But behind the scenes, racism and sexual harassment were still major problems, from the time you began your career until now. Have newsrooms evolved for the better when it comes to more inclusive behavior, Ira?
ROSEN: Oh, I think so. I mean, I think the Black Lives Matter change everybody who works in a newsroom. I think the idea of wrongfully convicted in jail, which affects predominantly people of color. I think that`s change. I think police brutality, frankly, has crystallized people. Suddenly he wakened people to like, where I have been? This has been going on for a really long time. Why haven`t I done these stories? And now those stories were being done. And I think that only helps elevate the entire country by that.
SHARPTON: Now, you tell a lot in the book that is stunning. You talk about how Steve Bannon thought early in the President Donald Trump`s presidency that he was having early stages of dementia, that they may have to take him out. You talk about a lot of internal fighting`s that you would find out. I mean, things that as well as you and I have talk that I did not even know what`s going on. But Steve Bannon really thought they may have to take Trump out of office?
ROSEN: Well, he was saying, the president doesn`t listen and he doesn`t read. And now, he`s repeating the same stories that he would tell minutes apart. And I sent him a column that was a David Brooks column in The New York Times, which was, let just read just a line of it. The Republican senators went to the White House and saw a president so repetitive and rambling, some thought he might be suffering from early Alzheimer`s. But they knew which way the wind is blowing. They gave him a standing ovation. It`s one of my favorite things.
Here, there are Republican senators who are saying this president in this state and he giving him a standing ovation. And Bannon sends me a text immediately saying you need to do the 25th Amendment piece. By the way, brother, I`ve never steered you wrong. So think about that?
SHARPTON: Wow.
ROSEN: I mean this concept the time, the senior most prominent adviser in the White House for the president who, in a sense, is trying to blow the whistle about what`s going on there.
SHARPTON: Well, a lot of that and much more is in this book. The book is called Ticking Clock, Behind the Scenes of 60 Minutes. Thank you, Ira Rosen.
Up next, my final thoughts. Stay with us.
SHARPTON: Today, Congressman John Lewis would have been 81 years old. One of the highlights of my life five years ago on the 50th Anniversary of when he and Ayanna Pressley and others were beaten on the Edmond Pettus Bridge in Selma, Alabama, had led to the 65 Voting Right Act. I was honored to walk behind John Lewis and President and Mrs. Obama holding part of the wheelchair arm of Ayanna Pressley across that bridge.
As we walked across that bridge, thinking that because of his suffering and her suffering and Reverend Jose Williams, it made it possible for Barack Obama, none of us would have thought that we would see a black woman become Vice President of the United States, a black woman that became that graduating from an HBCU, Howard University.
But we see now, six years after that march, even after John Lewis has gone on, that Kamala Harris sits as Vice President of the United States. And as I said at the beginning of the show, two years ago, today, I sat with her in Sylvia`s Restaurant, a soul food, iconic restaurant known all over the world, at the same table I sat with Barack Obama, and talked about her pursuing the dream for president. Well, she made it to vice president.
And next Saturday, I will show and interview I will do with her this week in Washington and the White House about where we are in black history now, what she means, what she hopes people will say about her and her uniqueness bringing into an unprecedented time and what our priorities.
It is not enough to just studied black history, it most make some. And you must know when your time comes, you must seize that time because history is going to be writing about what we do and don`t do one day, like it writes about John Lewis today on his birthday.
Part of our legacy in black history, in American history is to take the word possible out of the word impossible and make things happen that no one thought could ever happen. But making it happen is not just being the first at something. It`s about using that first to do so much that other impossibles become very possible and other firsts become even more expansive on making this a country, a nation that works for everyone equally.
Don`t forget next Saturday, tune in for my whole conversation with Vice President Kamala Harris.
That does it for me. Thanks for watching. I`ll see you back here next weekend at 5:00 P.M. Eastern with my exclusive interview with the first black vice president of the United States, Kamala Harris. That`s on Saturday right here on POLITICSNATION.
My colleague, Alicia Menendez, picks up our news coverage now.
ALICIA MENENDEZ: Thank you, Reverend Sharpton. We`re going to spend all week looking forward to that interview.
Hello, I`m Alicia Menendez, Welcome to AMERICAN VOICES. We begin this Sunday with a stark reality and a grim milestone. A few short hours ago, just after 2:00 P.M. Eastern, it became official that COVID --
THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT. THIS COPY MAY NOT BE IN ITS FINAL FORM AND MAY BE UPDATED.
Load-Date: February 22, 2021



End of Document


Water shortages test hospitals after storm
Tribune-Review (Greensburg, PA)
February 21, 2021 Sunday

Copyright 2021 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 869 words
Byline: <span class="neFMT neFMT_byline-source">Associated Press</span>
Body




HOUSTON -- Hospitals across the South grappled with water shortages Sunday as the region carried on with recovery efforts in the wake of a devastating winter storm, and the weather offered a balmy respite -- temperatures as high as the mid-60s. 
At the height of the storm, hospitals were left scrambling to care for patients amid record cold, snow and ice that battered parts of the country more accustomed to going through winter with light jackets and short sleeves. The icy blast ruptured water mains, knocked out power to millions of utility customers and contributed to at least 76 deaths -- half of which occurred in Texas. At least seven people died in Tennessee and four in Portland, Ore. 
A rural hospital in Anahuac, Texas, about 50 miles east of Houston, lost water and power. 
William Kiefer, CEO of Chambers Health, which runs the hospital along with two clinics and a wellness center, said the facilities resorted to backup generators and water from a 275-gallon storage tank. They refilled it three times using water from a swimming pool in the wellness center. 
Water was restored Thursday, and operations had returned to normal Sunday, he said. 
After temperatures plunged as much as 40 degrees below normal last week, the forecast for the Houston area called for a high of 65 degrees Sunday. The city lifted its boil-water advisory Sunday afternoon. 
Memphis saw 10 inches of snow last week. Memphis, Light, Gas & Water issued a boil-water advisory Thursday out of concern that low water pressure caused by problems at aging pumping stations and water main ruptures could lead to contamination. The advisory was still in place Sunday; utility officials said they did not know when they might lift it. 
About 260,000 homes and businesses were under the advisory. Hospitals and nursing homes have been forced to switch to bottled water. The Tennessee National Guard was supplying St. Francis Hospital with water. 
Nearby Baptist Memorial Hospital has taken on some of St. Francis' patients, particularly those who need dialysis, said Dr. Jeff Wright, a pulmonary and critical care physician at Baptist. That hospital has a water purification system for dialysis and has water reserves for tasks such as cooking and bathing patients, he said. 
"We have gallon jugs of water that were already stocked and ready to roll," Wright said. 
Methodist Le Bonheur Healthcare also reported problems at some of its Memphis-area facilities due to water pressure problems and the boil advisory. The system is using tanker trucks to boost water pressure and relying on help from facilities that have not been affected. 
City officials planned to distribute water bottles at several locations Sunday. Grocery stores struggled to keep shelves stocked with bottled water. Many restaurants remained closed.  
Flights resumed Saturday at Memphis International Airport after everything was grounded Friday because of water pressure problems. Some problems still lingered, but airport officials set up temporary restrooms.  
The White House said about a third of the COVID-19 vaccine doses delayed by the storm were delivered over the weekend.  
The weather created a backlog of about 6 million doses as power outages closed some vaccination centers and icy weather stranded vaccine in shipping hubs. White House press secretary Jen Psaki told ABC's "This Week" that about 2 million of those doses have gone out.  
In Nashville, Tennessee, local COVID-19 task force leader Dr. Alex Jahangir said more than 2,300 seniors and teachers got vaccinated Saturday as the city resumed offering shots after days of treacherous weather.  
Due to the wintry mess, local health officials last week vaccinated more than 500 people with doses that otherwise would have expired, including hundreds at homeless shelters and residents of a historically Black neighborhood who were mostly seniors with underlying health conditions.  
Nearly 230,000 customers across the South were still without power as of Sunday, according to PowerOutage.us, a website that tracks power outages. The largest blackouts were in Mississippi, Texas, West Virginia, Kentucky and Oregon. Each state had more than 30,000 customers without power.  
President Joe Biden is eager to visit Texas, which was hit especially hard by the weather, Psaki said. Biden hopes to travel to the state this week but "doesn't want to take away resources" from the response, she said. Biden declared a major disaster in Texas on Saturday.  
"He is ... very mindful of the fact that it's not a light footprint for a president to travel to a disaster area.  
Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner told CBS' "Face the Nation" that Biden can come anytime.  
"We certainly would welcome him," Turner said.  
Texas Rep. Michael McCaul told CNN's "State of the Union" that federal disaster relief can be used to repair burst pipes and flood damage and to help Texans hit with skyrocketing energy bills.  
McCaul also criticized fellow Republican Sen. Ted Cruz's decision to take his family on vacation amid the crisis.  
"When a crisis hits my state, I'm there," McCaul said. "I'm not going to go on some vacation. I know Mr. Cruz called it a mistake, and he's owned up to that. But I think that was a big mistake."  
Load-Date: February 23, 2021



End of Document


Parts Of Mississippi Under Boil Water Advisory Following Cold Snap
NPR Weekend Edition Sunday SHOW: Weekend Edition Sunday
February 21, 2021 Sunday

Copyright 2021 National Public Radio (R) All Rights Reserved
Length: 860 words
Anchors: Becca Schimmel; Lulu Garcia-Navarro
Guests: Jerrica Johnson, Carly Kaiser, Maya Miller
Body




LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO:                 President Joe Biden has declared a major disaster in Texas. That will make federal funds available for temporary housing, home repairs and low-cost loans as the state recovers from days of extreme winter weather. Warmer temperatures are bringing some relief, for people there and in other Gulf States. In Mississippi, utility crews are hard at work to restore power to thousands of customers. Joining us now from Jackson in Mississippi - joining us now from Jackson is Mississippi Public Broadcasting's Becca Schimmel. Good morning.             
BECCA SCHIMMEL:                 Good morning.             
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO:                 Tell us what it's been like there over the past few days.             
BECCA SCHIMMEL:                 Pretty frozen the past few days, but the sun finally came out yesterday, and more people were able to get their cars out and get on the road for essentials. Most of the state is still under a boil-water advisory, though, so a lot of the restaurants and other places are closed. I have just been able to get my car out this morning, but it was surrounded with a pretty thick layer of ice - pretty impressive.             
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO:                 Yeah.             
BECCA SCHIMMEL:                 I'm lucky that I haven't lost power, though, and I've had enough water trickling out to be able to fill a kettle and boil my water. And there were a couple of days this week where I may not have had enough water pressure to take a shower, but my pipes haven't burst or anything, so that's good.             
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO:                 That is good. And I imagine you've been talking to people in the city. What are they saying?             
BECCA SCHIMMEL:                 Yeah, well, since people can actually get out of their house and walk around now, I spoke with Jerrica Johnson (ph) about the storm while she was in line with her 8-year-old cousin at the grocery store. It was actually his birthday yesterday, so hopefully, he'll get to enjoy it, now that the ice is melting and the state is recovering. But Jerrica said it's been pretty tough.             
JERRICA JOHNSON:                 Not having water and stuff like that and going back and forth to the grocery store, not being able to drive, due to the ice. And things have been closed so early.             
BECCA SCHIMMEL:                 And down the street at the dry cleaners, Carly Kaiser (ph) is back at work after being closed the entire week, pretty much. She works in customer service, and she said she expected business to start picking back up next week. It was pretty dead when I went over there. Kaiser lost power for one day during the middle of the storm, but she's thankful it wasn't worse.             
CARLY KAISER:                 I've seen other people that have, you know, worse. They don't have water. They still don't have power and stuff like that. So I'm just thankful, you know, we have what we have.             
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO:                 It's so hard for residents, of course, but are businesses open? How are they dealing with the water situation?             
BECCA SCHIMMEL:                 Yeah, well, Urban Foxes - which is the coffee shop right around the corner from me - like many food service businesses, was closed pretty much all week. They've been pretty limited in what they can offer, having to boil water before they can use it, like the rest of Jackson and really many areas throughout Mississippi. Here's Maya Miller (ph), who works there.             
MAYA MILLER:                 Surprisingly, more people have showed up today than we thought would show up. I think everyone's a little bit - you know, got a little bit of cabin fever.             
BECCA SCHIMMEL:                 I did see more people out and about today and yesterday than I'd really seen all week. The city of Jackson's working to deliver water to the most vulnerable population right now - the elderly people who can't get out of their houses. But ultimately, Mississippi's infrastructure was stressed by the unprecedented and prolonged winter weather.             
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO:                 I can imagine. We've been hearing a lot from Texas about better preparing for extreme winter weather in the future. Are residents of the Gulf States having the same discussions?             
BECCA SCHIMMEL:                 Well, I don't think Mississippi or Louisiana officials feel that they can always justify spending money on snowplows or more road salt - not when they face the more common threat of flooding. During a press conference this past week, the mayor of Shreveport, La., said if he suggested buying road salt over more sand in case of flooding, he would be laughed out of the building. And the mayor of Jackson, Miss., agreed, but added that the problem this week wasn't really snow removal. It was ice, which the sun has much more power to solve than a plow or road salt.             
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO:                 That's Becca Schimmel of Mississippi Public Broadcasting. Thank you very much.             
BECCA SCHIMMEL:                 Thank you.             
Load-Date: February 11, 2025



End of Document


Hospitals confront water shortages in winter storm aftermath
Associated Press State & Local
February 21, 2021 Sunday 11:10 PM GMT

Copyright 2021 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS; STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 1013 words
Byline: JUAN LOZANO, JONATHAN MATTISE and ADRIAN SAINZ, Associated Press
Dateline: HOUSTON 
Body




HOUSTON (AP) — Hospitals across the South grappled with water shortages Sunday in the wake of a devastating winter storm as the region carried on with recovery efforts and the weather offered a balmy respite — temperatures as high as the mid-60s.
At the height of last week's storm, hospitals scrambled to care for patients amid record cold temperatures, snow and ice that battered parts of the country more accustomed to going through winter with light jackets and short sleeves. The icy blast ruptured water mains, knocked out power to millions of utility customers and contributed to at least 76 deaths — half of which occurred in Texas. At least seven people died in Tennessee and four in Portland, Oregon.
A rural hospital in Anahuac, Texas, about 50 miles (80 kilometers) east of Houston, lost both water and power.
William Kiefer, CEO of Chambers Health, which runs the hospital along with two clinics and a wellness center, said the facilities resorted to backup generators and water from a 275-gallon storage tank. They refilled it three times using water from a swimming pool in the wellness center.
When temperatures were in the teens last Monday, a woman about to give birth walked into the hospital after she could not make it through the ice and snow to her hospital in suburban Houston. Emergency room staff delivered the baby safely, Kiefer said.
“It would have taken her another two hours to get to (the suburban Houston hospital) if our facility wasn't there,” he said. “We can probably assume she would have had the baby in her car and the snow. Not a good situation.”
Water was restored Thursday, and operations had returned to normal on Sunday, he said. The health system plans to look into installing more sophisticated backup systems, he said.
Houston Methodist Hospital spokeswoman Gale Smith said water had been restored at two community hospitals in the system, which was dealing with an influx of dialysis patients after their local centers closed, she added.
After temperatures plunged as much as 40 degrees below normal last week, the forecast for the Houston area called for a high of 65 degrees (18 degrees Celsius) on Sunday. The city lifted its boil-water advisory on Sunday afternoon.
About 30,000 Texans were still without power due to downed power lines and other equipment failures. Gov. Greg Abbott said during a news conference that he expected all service to be restored by Sunday night or Monday.
Abbott also said he was concerned about the threat of massive electric bills after wholesale energy prices skyrocketed while power plants were offline. He said it would be the “top priority” for the Legislature, and he vowed not to end the legislative session until lawmakers ensure that the state’s power grid is retrofitted to handle extreme winter and summer weather.
Nearly 230,000 customers across the South were still without power as of Sunday, according to PowerOutage.us, a website that tracks power outages. Other large blackouts were in Mississippi, West Virginia, Kentucky and Oregon.
Memphis, Tennessee, saw 10 inches of snow last week. Memphis, Light, Gas & Water issued a boil-water advisory on Thursday out of concern that low water pressure caused by problems at aging pumping stations and water main ruptures could lead to contamination. The advisory was still in place Sunday; utility officials said they did not know when they might lift it.
About 260,000 homes and businesses were under the advisory. Hospitals and nursing homes have been forced to switch to bottled water. The Tennessee National Guard was supplying St. Francis Hospital with water.
Nearby Baptist Memorial Hospital took on some of St. Francis' patients, particularly those who need dialysis, said Dr. Jeff Wright, a pulmonary and critical care physician at Baptist. That hospital has a water purification system for dialysis and has water reserves for tasks such as cooking and bathing patients, he said.
“We have gallon jugs of water that were already stocked and ready to roll on day one,” Wright said.
Methodist Le Bonheur Healthcare also reported problems at some of its Memphis-area facilities due to water pressure problems and the boil advisory. The system is using tanker trucks to boost water pressure and relying on help from facilities that have not been affected.
City officials planned to distribute water bottles at several locations Sunday. Grocery stores struggled to keep shelves stocked with bottled water. Many restaurants remained closed.
In Washington, the White House said about a third of the COVID-19 vaccine doses delayed by the storm were delivered over the weekend.
The weather created a backlog of about 6 million doses as power outages closed some vaccination centers and icy weather stranded vaccine in shipping hubs. White House press secretary Jen Psaki told ABC's “This Week” that about 2 million of those doses have gone out.
President Joe Biden is eager to visit Texas, which was hit especially hard by the weather, Psaki said. Biden hopes to travel to the state this week but “doesn't want to take away resources” from the response, she said. Biden declared a major disaster in Texas on Saturday.
 "He is . . . very mindful of the fact that it’s not a light footprint for a president to travel to a disaster area.
Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner told CBS' “Face the Nation” that Biden can come anytime.
“We certainly would welcome him,” Turner said.
Texas Rep. Michael McCaul told CNN's “State of the Union” that federal disaster relief can be used to repair burst pipes and flood damage and to help Texans hit with skyrocketing energy bills.
McCaul also criticized fellow Republican Sen. Ted Cruz's decision to take his family on vacation amid the crisis.
“When a crisis hits my state, I'm there,” McCaul said. “I'm not going to go on some vacation. I know Mr. Cruz called it a mistake, and he's owned up to that. But I think that was a big mistake.”
___
Mattise reported from Nashville, Tennessee. Sainz reported from Memphis, Tennessee. Associated Press writers Hope Yen in Austin, Texas, and Zeke Miller in Washington contributed to this report.
Load-Date: February 22, 2021



End of Document



CHAIRS MALONEY AND THOMPSON LAUNCH FORMAL INVESTIGATION INTO MISSISSIPPI GOVERNOR'S DISTRIBUTION OF FEDERAL FUNDS FOR WATER SYSTEM REPAIRS IN JACKSON
States News Service
October 17, 2022 Monday

Copyright 2022 States News Service
Length: 505 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: WASHINGTON, DC 
Body




The following information was released by the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Oversight and Government Reform:
Today, Rep. Carolyn B. Malone y, Chairwoman of the Committee on Oversight and Reform, and Rep. Bennie G. Thompson, Chairman of the Committee on Homeland Security, sent a letter to Mississippi Governor Tate Reeves requesting information on how the state plans to distribute more than $10 billion in federal funding from the American Rescue Plan Act and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, including $429 million that was specifically allotted to enhance the state's water infrastructure.
"We urge you to take action to protect the health and safety of Jackson residents and direct funding to Jackson immediately to fix this life and death issue," wrote the Chairs.
"This funding must be sustained to ensure that a safe and dependable drinking water system endures, especially in the face of climate change that will put even more stress on the city's water infrastructure."
On August 30, 2022, President Biden declared the Jackson water crisis a federal emergency after torrential rain in the Jackson area left residents without reliable access to safe drinking water for more than two weeks.
Scientists have concluded that the rise in coastal sea-levels and frequent flooding in Mississippiwhich contributed to the water crisis in Jacksonare a direct result of climate change. The city, the majority of whose residents are Black, has also suffered decades of disinvestment, and residents report they have not gone more than a month without a "boil water" notice in effect for over two years.
The American Rescue Plan and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law made billions of dollars available to Mississippi to address a variety of problems, however, criteria used by the state to allocate federal funding may limit the funds Jackson receives compared to other locales, despite Jackson's much greater need. The Mississippi legislature's decision to allocate federal funding from the State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds program on a matching basis with municipalities risks further perpetuating underinvestment in Jackson. The cost of necessary maintenance to Jackson's water distribution systems is projected to be as high as $1 billion. Under the matching formula Mississippi adopted for American Rescue Plan funds, Jackson would directly receive, at most, around $84 million for water projects.
Jackson city officials informed Committee staff that the state has repeatedly sought to limit funding for Jackson to address its unsafe water systems, including the state's initial plan to bar communities of more than 4,000 people from competing for additional funding from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
In light of this information, the Chairs requested that the Governor provide the Committees with information related to the State of Mississippi's efforts to address the water crisis in Jackson and improve drinking water infrastructure, including the distribution of federal funds to localities, by October 31, 2022.
Load-Date: October 17, 2022



End of Document


CHAIRS MALONEY AND THOMPSON LAUNCH FORMAL INVESTIGATION INTO MISSISSIPPI GOVERNOR'S DISTRIBUTION OF FEDERAL FUNDS FOR WATER SYSTEM REPAIRS IN JACKSON
US Fed News
October 17, 2022 Monday 8:27 PM  EST

Copyright 2022 HT Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Length: 528 words
Body




WASHINGTON, Oct. 17 -- Ranking Member of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee issued the following news release:
Today, Rep. Carolyn B. Maloney, Chairwoman of the Committee on Oversight and Reform, and Rep. Bennie G. Thompson, Chairman of the Committee on Homeland Security, sent a letter to Mississippi Governor Tate Reeves requesting information on how the state plans to distribute more than $10 billion in federal funding from the American Rescue Plan Act and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, including $429 million that was specifically allotted to enhance the state's water infrastructure.
"We urge you to take action to protect the health and safety of Jackson residents and direct funding to Jackson immediately to fix this life and death issue," wrote the Chairs.
"This funding must be sustained to ensure that a safe and dependable drinking water system endures, especially in the face of climate change that will put even more stress on the city's water infrastructure."
On August 30, 2022, President Biden declared the Jackson water crisis a federal emergency after torrential rain in the Jackson area left residents without reliable access to safe drinking water for more than two weeks.
Scientists have concluded that the rise in coastal sea-levels and frequent flooding in Mississippi-which contributed to the water crisis in Jackson-are a direct result of climate change. The city, the majority of whose residents are Black, has also suffered decades of disinvestment, and residents report they have not gone more than a month without a "boil water" notice in effect for over two years.
The American Rescue Plan and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law made billions of dollars available to Mississippi to address a variety of problems, however, criteria used by the state to allocate federal funding may limit the funds Jackson receives compared to other locales, despite Jackson's much greater need. The Mississippi legislature's decision to allocate federal funding from the State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds program on a matching basis with municipalities risks further perpetuating underinvestment in Jackson. The cost of necessary maintenance to Jackson's water distribution systems is projected to be as high as $1 billion. Under the matching formula Mississippi adopted for American Rescue Plan funds, Jackson would directly receive, at most, around $84 million for water projects.
Jackson city officials informed Committee staff that the state has repeatedly sought to limit funding for Jackson to address its unsafe water systems, including the state's initial plan to bar communities of more than 4,000 people from competing for additional funding from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
In light of this information, the Chairs requested that the Governor provide the Committees with information related to the State of Mississippi's efforts to address the water crisis in Jackson and improve drinking water infrastructure, including the distribution of federal funds to localities, by October 31, 2022. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
Load-Date: October 20, 2022



End of Document


Chairs Maloney and Thompson Launch Formal Investigation into Mississippi Governor's Distribution of Federal Funds for Water System Repairs in Jackson
Congressional Documents and Publications
October 17, 2022

Copyright 2022 Federal Information and News Dispatch, Inc.
Section: U.S. SENATE DOCUMENTS
Length: 519 words
Body




Chairs Maloney and Thompson Launch Formal Investigation into Mississippi Governor's Distribution of Federal Funds for Water System Repairs in Jackson
October 17, 2022 (WASHINGTON) - Today, Rep. Bennie G. Thompson (D-MS), Chairman of the Committee on Homeland Security, and Rep. Carolyn B. Malone'y (D-NY), Chairwoman of the Committee on Oversight and Reform, sent a letter to Mississippi Governor Tate Reeves requesting information on how the state plans to "distribute more than $10 billion in federal funding from the American Rescue Plan Act and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, including $429 million that was specifically allotted to enhance the state's water infrastructure.
"We urge you to take action to protect the health and safety of Jackson residents and direct funding to Jackson immediately to fix this life and death issue," wrote the Chairs.
"This funding must be sustained to ensure that a safe and dependable drinking water system endures, especially in the face of climate change that will put even more stress on the city's water infrastructure."
On August 30, 2022, President Biden declared the Jackson water crisis a federal emergency after torrential rain in the Jackson area left residents without reliable access to safe drinking water for more than two weeks.
Scientists have concluded that the rise in coastal sea-levels and frequent flooding in Mississippi--which contributed to the water crisis in Jackson--are a direct result of climate change. The city, the majority of whose residents are Black, has also suffered decades of disinvestment, and residents report they have not gone more than a month without a "boil water" notice in effect for over two years.
The American Rescue Plan and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law made billions of dollars available to Mississippi to address a variety of problems, however, criteria used by the state" to allocate federal funding may limit the funds Jackson receives compared to other locales, despite Jackson's much greater need. The Mississippi legislature's decision to allocate federal funding from the State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds program on a matching basis with municipalities risks further perpetuating underinvestment in Jackson. The cost of necessary maintenance to Jackson's water distribution systems is projected to be as high as $1 billion. Under the matching formula Mississippi adopted for American Rescue Plan funds, Jackson would directly" receive, at most, around $84? million for water projects.
Jackson city officials informed Committee staff that the state has repeatedly sought to limit funding for Jackson to address its unsafe water systems, including the state's initial plan to bar communities of more than 4,000 people from competing for additional funding from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
In light of this information, the Chairs requested that the Governor provide the Committees with information related to the State of Mississippi's efforts to address the water crisis in Jackson and improve drinking water infrastructure, including the distribution of federal funds to localities, by October 28, 2022.
Load-Date: October 17, 2022



End of Document


CHAIRS MALONEY AND THOMPSON LAUNCH FORMAL INVESTIGATION INTO MISSISSIPPI GOVERNOR'S DISTRIBUTION OF FEDERAL FUNDS FOR WATER SYSTEM REPAIRS IN JACKSON
US Fed News
October 17, 2022 Monday 8:44 PM  EST

Copyright 2022 HT Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Length: 527 words
Body




WASHINGTON, Oct. 17 -- Democrats on the House Homeland Security Committee issued the following news release:
Today, Rep. Bennie G. Thompson (D-MS), Chairman of the Committee on Homeland Security, and Rep. Carolyn B. Maloney (D-NY), Chairwoman of the Committee on Oversight and Reform, sent a letter to Mississippi Governor Tate Reeves requesting information on how the state plans to distribute more than $10 billion in federal funding from the American Rescue Plan Act and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, including $429 million that was specifically allotted to enhance the state's water infrastructure.
"We urge you to take action to protect the health and safety of Jackson residents and direct funding to Jackson immediately to fix this life and death issue," wrote the Chairs.
"This funding must be sustained to ensure that a safe and dependable drinking water system endures, especially in the face of climate change that will put even more stress on the city's water infrastructure."
On August 30, 2022, President Biden declared the Jackson water crisis a federal emergency after torrential rain in the Jackson area left residents without reliable access to safe drinking water for more than two weeks.
Scientists have concluded that the rise in coastal sea-levels and frequent flooding in Mississippi-which contributed to the water crisis in Jackson-are a direct result of climate change. The city, the majority of whose residents are Black, has also suffered decades of disinvestment, and residents report they have not gone more than a month without a "boil water" notice in effect for over two years.
The American Rescue Plan and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law made billions of dollars available to Mississippi to address a variety of problems, however, criteria used by the state to allocate federal funding may limit the funds Jackson receives compared to other locales, despite Jackson's much greater need. The Mississippi legislature's decision to allocate federal funding from the State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds program on a matching basis with municipalities risks further perpetuating underinvestment in Jackson. The cost of necessary maintenance to Jackson's water distribution systems is projected to be as high as $1 billion. Under the matching formula Mississippi adopted for American Rescue Plan funds, Jackson would directly receive, at most, around $84 million for water projects.
Jackson city officials informed Committee staff that the state has repeatedly sought to limit funding for Jackson to address its unsafe water systems, including the state's initial plan to bar communities of more than 4,000 people from competing for additional funding from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
In light of this information, the Chairs requested that the Governor provide the Committees with information related to the State of Mississippi's efforts to address the water crisis in Jackson and improve drinking water infrastructure, including the distribution of federal funds to localities, by October 31, 2022. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
Load-Date: October 20, 2022



End of Document


Chairs Maloney and Thompson Launch Formal Investigation into Mississippi Governor's Distribution of Federal Funds for Water System Repairs in Jackson; House Oversight and Reform Committee News Release
Congressional Documents and Publications
October 17, 2022

Copyright 2022 Federal Information and News Dispatch, Inc.
Section: U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES DOCUMENTS
Length: 518 words
Body




Washington, D.C. (October 17, 2022)--Today, Rep. Carolyn B. Malone?y, Chairwoman of the Committee on Oversight and Reform, and Rep. Bennie G. Thompson, Chairman of the Committee on Homeland Security, sent a letter to Mississippi Governor Tate Reeves requesting information on how the state plans to ?distribute more than $10 billion in federal funding from the American Rescue Plan Act and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, including $429 million that was specifically allotted to enhance the state's water infrastructure.
"We urge you to take action to protect the health and safety of Jackson residents and direct funding to Jackson immediately to fix this life and death issue," wrote the Chairs.
"This funding must be sustained to ensure that a safe and dependable drinking water system endures, especially in the face of climate change that will put even more stress on the city's water infrastructure."
On August 30, 2022, President Biden declared the Jackson water crisis a federal emergency after torrential rain in the Jackson area left residents without reliable access to safe drinking water for more than two weeks.
Scientists have concluded that the rise in coastal sea-levels and frequent flooding in Mississippi--which contributed to the water crisis in Jackson--are a direct result of climate change. The city, the majority of whose residents are Black, has also suffered decades of disinvestment, and residents report they have not gone more than a month without a "boil water" notice in effect for over two years.
The American Rescue Plan and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law made billions of dollars available to Mississippi to address a variety of problems, however, criteria used by the state? to allocate federal funding may limit the funds Jackson receives compared to other locales, despite Jackson's much greater need. The Mississippi legislature's decision to allocate federal funding from the State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds program on a matching basis with municipalities risks further perpetuating underinvestment in Jackson. The cost of necessary maintenance to Jackson's water distribution systems is projected to be as high as $1 billion. Under the matching formula Mississippi adopted for American Rescue Plan funds, Jackson would directly? receive, at most, around $84? million for water projects.
Jackson city officials informed Committee staff that the state has repeatedly sought to limit funding for Jackson to address its unsafe water systems, including the state's initial plan to bar communities of more than 4,000 people from competing for additional funding from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
In light of this information, the Chairs requested that the Governor provide the Committees with information related to the State of Mississippi's efforts to address the water crisis in Jackson and improve drinking water infrastructure, including the distribution of federal funds to localities, by October 31, 2022.
Read this original document at: https://oversight.house.gov/news/press-releases/chairs-maloney-and-thompson-launch-formal-investigation-into-mississippi
Load-Date: October 18, 2022



End of Document


CHAIRS MALONEY AND THOMPSON LAUNCH FORMAL INVESTIGATION INTO MISSISSIPPI GOVERNOR'S DISTRIBUTION OF FEDERAL FUNDS FOR WATER SYSTEM REPAIRS IN JACKSON
US Fed News
October 17, 2022 Monday 8:07 PM  EST

Copyright 2022 HT Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Length: 528 words
Body




WASHINGTON, Oct. 17 -- Ranking Member of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee issued the following news release:
Today, Rep. Carolyn B. Maloney, Chairwoman of the Committee on Oversight and Reform, and Rep. Bennie G. Thompson, Chairman of the Committee on Homeland Security, sent a letter to Mississippi Governor Tate Reeves requesting information on how the state plans to distribute more than $10 billion in federal funding from the American Rescue Plan Act and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, including $429 million that was specifically allotted to enhance the state's water infrastructure.
"We urge you to take action to protect the health and safety of Jackson residents and direct funding to Jackson immediately to fix this life and death issue," wrote the Chairs.
"This funding must be sustained to ensure that a safe and dependable drinking water system endures, especially in the face of climate change that will put even more stress on the city's water infrastructure."
On August 30, 2022, President Biden declared the Jackson water crisis a federal emergency after torrential rain in the Jackson area left residents without reliable access to safe drinking water for more than two weeks.
Scientists have concluded that the rise in coastal sea-levels and frequent flooding in Mississippi-which contributed to the water crisis in Jackson-are a direct result of climate change. The city, the majority of whose residents are Black, has also suffered decades of disinvestment, and residents report they have not gone more than a month without a "boil water" notice in effect for over two years.
The American Rescue Plan and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law made billions of dollars available to Mississippi to address a variety of problems, however, criteria used by the state to allocate federal funding may limit the funds Jackson receives compared to other locales, despite Jackson's much greater need. The Mississippi legislature's decision to allocate federal funding from the State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds program on a matching basis with municipalities risks further perpetuating underinvestment in Jackson. The cost of necessary maintenance to Jackson's water distribution systems is projected to be as high as $1 billion. Under the matching formula Mississippi adopted for American Rescue Plan funds, Jackson would directly receive, at most, around $84 million for water projects.
Jackson city officials informed Committee staff that the state has repeatedly sought to limit funding for Jackson to address its unsafe water systems, including the state's initial plan to bar communities of more than 4,000 people from competing for additional funding from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
In light of this information, the Chairs requested that the Governor provide the Committees with information related to the State of Mississippi's efforts to address the water crisis in Jackson and improve drinking water infrastructure, including the distribution of federal funds to localities, by October 31, 2022. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
Load-Date: October 18, 2022



End of Document


Chairs Maloney and Thompson Launch Formal Investigation into Mississippi Governor's Distribution of Federal Funds for Water System Repairs in Jackson
Congressional Documents and Publications
October 17, 2022

Copyright 2022 Federal Information and News Dispatch, Inc.
Section: U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES DOCUMENTS
Length: 519 words
Body




Chairs Maloney and Thompson Launch Formal Investigation into Mississippi Governor's Distribution of Federal Funds for Water System Repairs in Jackson
October 17, 2022 (WASHINGTON) - Today, Rep. Bennie G. Thompson (D-MS), Chairman of the Committee on Homeland Security, and Rep. Carolyn B. Malone'y (D-NY), Chairwoman of the Committee on Oversight and Reform, sent a letter to Mississippi Governor Tate Reeves requesting information on how the state plans to "distribute more than $10 billion in federal funding from the American Rescue Plan Act and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, including $429 million that was specifically allotted to enhance the state's water infrastructure.
"We urge you to take action to protect the health and safety of Jackson residents and direct funding to Jackson immediately to fix this life and death issue," wrote the Chairs.
"This funding must be sustained to ensure that a safe and dependable drinking water system endures, especially in the face of climate change that will put even more stress on the city's water infrastructure."
On August 30, 2022, President Biden declared the Jackson water crisis a federal emergency after torrential rain in the Jackson area left residents without reliable access to safe drinking water for more than two weeks.
Scientists have concluded that the rise in coastal sea-levels and frequent flooding in Mississippi--which contributed to the water crisis in Jackson--are a direct result of climate change. The city, the majority of whose residents are Black, has also suffered decades of disinvestment, and residents report they have not gone more than a month without a "boil water" notice in effect for over two years.
The American Rescue Plan and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law made billions of dollars available to Mississippi to address a variety of problems, however, criteria used by the state" to allocate federal funding may limit the funds Jackson receives compared to other locales, despite Jackson's much greater need. The Mississippi legislature's decision to allocate federal funding from the State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds program on a matching basis with municipalities risks further perpetuating underinvestment in Jackson. The cost of necessary maintenance to Jackson's water distribution systems is projected to be as high as $1 billion. Under the matching formula Mississippi adopted for American Rescue Plan funds, Jackson would directly" receive, at most, around $84? million for water projects.
Jackson city officials informed Committee staff that the state has repeatedly sought to limit funding for Jackson to address its unsafe water systems, including the state's initial plan to bar communities of more than 4,000 people from competing for additional funding from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
In light of this information, the Chairs requested that the Governor provide the Committees with information related to the State of Mississippi's efforts to address the water crisis in Jackson and improve drinking water infrastructure, including the distribution of federal funds to localities, by October 28, 2022.
Load-Date: October 19, 2022



End of Document


CHAIRS MALONEY AND THOMPSON LAUNCH FORMAL INVESTIGATION INTO MISSISSIPPI GOVERNOR'S DISTRIBUTION OF FEDERAL FUNDS FOR WATER SYSTEM REPAIRS IN JACKSON
US Fed News
October 17, 2022 Monday 7:57 PM  EST

Copyright 2022 HT Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Length: 646 words
Body




WASHINGTON, Oct. 17 -- The House Homeland Security Committee issued the following news release:
Today, Rep. Bennie G. Thompson (D-MS), Chairman of the Committee on Homeland Security, and Rep. Carolyn B. Maloney (D-NY), Chairwoman of the Committee on Oversight and Reform, sent a letter (https://oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/2022-10-17.CBM%20BGT%20to%20Reeves-MS%20re%20Jackson%20Water%20Crisis.pdf) to Mississippi Governor Tate Reeves requesting information on how the state plans to distribute more than $10 billion in federal funding from the American Rescue Plan Act and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, including $429 million that was specifically allotted to enhance the state's water infrastructure.
"We urge you to take action to protect the health and safety of Jackson residents and direct funding to Jackson immediately to fix this life and death issue," wrote the Chairs.
"This funding must be sustained to ensure that a safe and dependable drinking water system endures, especially in the face of climate change that will put even more stress on the city's water infrastructure."
On August 30, 2022, President Biden declared (http://www.reuters.com/world/us/thousands-mississippis-capital-without-water-after-treatment-plant-fails-2022-08-30/) the Jackson water crisis a federal emergency after torrential rain in the Jackson area left residents without reliable access to safe drinking water for more than two weeks.
Scientists have concluded (http://www.clarionledger.com/story/news/2022/09/18/climate-change-what-mississippians-can-expect/69487206007/) that the rise in coastal sea-levels and frequent flooding in Mississippi-which contributed to the water crisis in Jackson-are a direct result of climate change. The city, the majority of whose residents are Black, has also suffered decades of disinvestment, and residents report (http://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-62783900) they have not gone more than a month without a "boil water" notice in effect for over two years.
The American Rescue Plan and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law made billions of dollars available to Mississippi to address a variety of problems, however, criteria used by the state to allocate federal funding may limit the funds Jackson receives compared to other locales, despite Jackson's much greater need. The Mississippi legislature's decision (http://www.clarionledger.com/story/news/2022/04/08/jackson-misses-out-water-and-sewer-funding/9514663002/) to allocate federal funding from the State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds program on a matching basis with municipalities risks further perpetuating underinvestment in Jackson. The cost of necessary maintenance to Jackson's water distribution systems is projected to be as high as $1 billion (http://www.enr.com/articles/54735-jackson-water-crisis-will-cost-billions-to-fix-mayor-says). Under the matching formula (http://www.supertalk.fm/jackson-city-council-agrees-to-use-remaining-arpa-funds-on-water-crisis/) Mississippi adopted for American Rescue Plan funds, Jackson would directly receive, at most, around $84 million for water projects.
Jackson city officials informed Committee staff that the state has repeatedly sought to limit funding for Jackson to address its unsafe water systems, including the state's initial plan to bar communities of more than 4,000 people from competing for additional funding from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
In light of this information, the Chairs requested that the Governor provide the Committees with information related to the State of Mississippi's efforts to address the water crisis in Jackson and improve drinking water infrastructure, including the distribution of federal funds to localities, by October 31, 2022. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
Load-Date: October 18, 2022



End of Document


CRIME, FIRE & PUBLIC SAFETY; Man found shot on Del Cerro street dies
The San Diego Union-Tribune
October 17, 2022 Monday
Final Edition

Copyright 2022 The San Diego Union-Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: LOCAL; Part B; Pg. 1
Length: 652 words
Body




SAN DIEGO
A man found with a gunshot wound on a Del Cerro street early Sunday died later, and homicide detectives are investigating, police said.
Officers responding to a report of a loud bang found the victim lying in the street on Adobe Falls Road near Adobe Falls Place, said San Diego police Officer Lawanda Fisher. The man had been shot in his chest.
A resident in the Del Cerro neighborhood had called police around 12:48 a.m. to report a loud noise, Fisher said.
Officers performed life-saving measures, but the man died at the scene at 1:16 a.m., police said in a news release.
The man has not yet been identified. No information about what led up to the shooting was released.
kate.morrissey@sduniontribune.com
Firefighters extinguish blaze near shopping center
OCEANSIDE
Firefighters quickly extinguished a vegetation fire behind an Oceanside shopping center Sunday, authorities said.
Crews responded to a report of thick smoke and flames in thick vegetation behind the Albertsons on Marron Road near College Boulevard around 4:20 a.m., officials said.
Firefighters from Oceanside, Vista and Carlsbad  stopped its spread within 20 minutes of arriving, authorities said.
It took about an hour to fully put out the fire because of the vegetation, fire officials said. They also noted that debris in the area indicated it likely was being used as a homeless encampment.  No injuries were reported.
City News Service
Fire burns outside of bank in City Heights area
SAN DIEGO
A fire that started around a dumpster outside a bank in the City Heights area reached the eaves of the building before it was extinguished on Sunday morning, according to the San Diego Fire-Rescue Department.
The fire was reported around 7:40 a.m. at a two-story U.S. Bank branch on El Cajon Boulevard near South 35th Street, on the border  between Normal Heights and City Heights.
The fire was extinguished within 20 minutes, according to the fire department.
"We made quick work of it," Battalion Chief Matt Nilsen said.
An investigation determined the fire began in a homeless encampment, Nilsen said. No damage estimate was released.
kate.morrissey@sduniontribune.com
Water main break closes block of Morena Blvd.
SAN DIEGO
One side of a street in the Morena neighborhood was shut down early Sunday after a water main burst and was  closed most of the day, San Diego officials said.
The incident prompted authorities to shut down the southbound side of Morena Boulevard near the split with West Morena Boulevard, San Diego police said. Northbound traffic on Morena was not affected by the closure.
The water main break was reported shortly before 5 a.m. Sunday morning, according to Sgt. Brent Devore. A little after 6 a.m., the city crew working on the repair told police that the road closure would need to remain in place for about 18 hours.
Video from OnScene TV showed a large sinkhole in the traffic lanes.
City spokesperson Arian Collins said around midday that crews were working on the repairs, but could not provide an estimate for when the work would be completed. About 6:45 p.m., the city said on Twitter that the closure "may remain" in place "into Monday morning."
About 28 properties were affected, and will receive a precautionary boil water notice. The city sent two water wagons to the area for those left without water service, Collins said.
kate.morrissey@sduniontribune.com
Crews make repairs after pipe breaks
OCEANSIDE
Crews were making repairs after an apparent water main break in Oceanside on Sunday, officials said.
Douglas Street was expected to be closed to northbound traffic between Old River Street and North River Road while crews worked on repairs overnight, police said.
The street started to flood around 5:30 p.m.
Crews with the city's public works and water utilities departments responded. They shut off the water and started to work on repairs.
No other details were immediately available.
david.hernandez@sduniontribune.com
Load-Date: October 17, 2022



End of Document


GOVERNOR RON DESANTIS ISSUES UPDATES ON HURRICANE IAN RECOVERY ON OCTOBER 17, 2022
States News Service
October 17, 2022 Monday

Copyright 2022 States News Service
Length: 7718 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: TALLAHASSEE, FL 
Body




The following information was released by the office of the Governor of Florida:
Today, Governor Ron DeSantis visited Toledo Blade Elementary in North Port on the first day back in session following Hurricane Ian. While there, the Governor announced over $200 million in awards through the School Recognition Program to 1,400 schools across the state that have demonstrated student growth and teaching excellence. In Southwest Florida, 96 schools received $13 million from this program. To watch the Governor's full remarks, click here.
Yesterday, Governor DeSantis was in Flagler County to receive a briefing from local officials and survey areas impacted by Hurricane Ian. Since Hurricane Ian, the state has supported recovery efforts in Flagler County by working with the Florida National Guard to provide high-water vehicles for search and rescue efforts, delivering 20 septic pump trucks to remove wastewater and providing safety signage for water on roadways. The Governor also announced the approval of Florida's Dislocated Worker Grant Request.
Today, First Lady Casey DeSantis highlighted the Florida Disaster Fund and the support it has received from private entities across the nation. The Florida Disaster Fund has raised over $45 million since activation. To read more, click here. To contribute, please visit www.FloridaDisasterFund.org or text DISASTER to 20222.
Additionally, the First Lady has worked with the State Disaster Recovery Mental Health Coordinator, Sara Newhouse, to compile a webpage of resources to help first responders navigate resources for mental health needs post hurricane. To visit the site, click here. Mental health resources for individuals and communities are available at MyFLFamilies.com/HurricaneIan. Floridians' health and well-being are a top priority, and the Department of Children and Families is reminding individuals that they are not alone. All Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian can find someone to talk to today through the Disaster Distress Helpline by calling 800-985-5990.
Additional programs that have been put into place to aid communities include the activation of the Florida Small Business Emergency Bridge Loan Program, the initiation of the Army Corps of Engineers' Operation Blue Roof, and FDOT's diligent work to construct temporary bridges into areas that are cut off from motorists. First Lady Casey DeSantis, Volunteer Florida and Tervis have created a design with Florida imagery for a new tumbler product. With every sale of this tumbler, all proceeds will go to the Florida Disaster Fund. Products are available for purchase on the Tervis website HERE and will soon be available in stores for purchase.
If you are an Xfinity customer experiencing internet connectivity issues and you live in a predominately restored location and find that after restarting your modem your services are still not working, the lines delivering service to your home may be damaged. Please go to the Status Center to troubleshoot or use your Xfinity App to chat with a representative or call 1-800-XFINITY (1-800-934-6489) to report your service interruption.
State response efforts include:
Search and Rescue
There have been 2,500 rescues made to date.
More than 1,000 team members performed search and rescue.
DCF has created a First Responder Support Line (407-823-1657) that all first responders throughout the impacted areas can contact. This line combines current resources into a single point of contact that will connect first responders with mental health professionals.
The State Disaster Recovery Mental Health Coordinator created a survey to assess the need for mental health services for Hurricane Ian first responders.
Following Governor DeSantis' authorization, Joint Task Force Florida has 4,351 personnel activated and is executing missions in response to Hurricane Ian. The Florida National Guard has supported a total of 246 missions.
Task Force engineering resources have been deployed to assist with route clearance in Pine Island and Charlotte County. The Florida National Guard has cleared 51.5 miles to date in the impacted area. Guardsmen continue to assist law enforcement with roving patrols, security, traffic control and curfew enforcement missions.
Florida Division of Emergency Management (FDEM)
At the request of Governor DeSantis, FDEM worked with federal partners to secure an additional 30 days of 100% federal cost share for Public Assistance Category A (debris removal) and Category B (emergency protective measures) for Hurricane Ian recovery efforts. More information can be found here.
Counties eligible for FEMA Individual Assistance include Brevard, Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Flagler, Glades, Hardee, Hendry, Highlands, Hillsborough, Lake, Lee, Manatee, Monroe, Okeechobee, Orange, Osceola, Palm Beach, Pasco, Pinellas, Polk, Putnam, Sarasota, Seminole, St. Johns and Volusia. Impacted residents can apply at DisasterAssistance.gov. As of October 17, there were 607,019 valid registrations with over $453 million approved.
FDEM has worked with FEMA to activate the Transitional Sheltering Assistance (TSA) Program for impacted residents in counties declared for FEMA Individual Assistance. FDEM will continue to work with FEMA to determine additional unmet needs for residents in newly declared counties for Individual Assistance. Individuals can apply for disaster assistance and may be eligible for TSA if they cannot return to their home.
USACE debris removal Subject Matter Experts are coordinating with city and county personnel to conduct volume estimates and mission analysis for debris removal in impacted areas.
The Crisis Cleanup Line, 800-451-1954, provides debris removal services to impacted residents, and has completed more than 1,000 requests to date.
In coordination with federal and state partners, more than 100 pets have been rescued through air operations from the Barrier Islands.
Under State Coordinating Officer Kevin Guthrie, members of the Forward SERT have deployed to Southwest Florida to coordinate recovery efforts on scene.
More than 14 million meals and 51 million bottles of water have been distributed so far.
All PODs have been closed as of October 13.
More than 308,000 bags of ice have been distributed throughout the state.
FDEM is working with feeding partners to operate kitchens for impacted and displaced residents. More than 2.4 million hot meals have been served since volunteer kitchens opened.
FDEM is coordinating with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to conduct infrastructure assessments of water treatment plants, wastewater treatment plants, and assisted living facilities.
Through the Emergency Management Assistance Compact (EMAC), more than 1,800 personnel from 26 states have deployed to Florida to assist in response and recovery efforts.
FDEM has activated the State Assistance Information Line (SAIL) to provide an additional resource for Floridians to receive up-to-date information regarding Hurricane Ian. Residents and visitors can call this toll-free hotline at 1-800-342-3557.
FDEM maintains 8 fuel depots across Central and Southwest Florida to provide fuel for first responders. A public, mobile fuel depot is open at the Wa-Ke Hatchee Recreation Center and Park in Harlem Heights to provide fuel for vehicles and gas cans for generators to impacted residents.
FDEM has received more than 6,382 resource requests for Hurricane Ian and fulfilled. More than 3600 requests have been completed and approximately 1800 being processed and are either in route or being mobilized. This includes the coordination of resources such as: trucks of food and water, generators and tarps.
FDEM is mobilizing pet food and supplies for displaced pets, including: rabies vaccines, dry and canned dog food, dry and canned cat food, cat litter, disposable pet bowls and disposable leashes.
120 critical lift stations at wastewater treatment plants have been brought back online in Lee County through the utilization of generators and/or pumps.
FDEM has deployed the State Mental Health Coordinator to connect with community providers, voluntary organizations, first responder support agencies, and state agency partners to identify and address mental health needs within the affected communities.
FDEM is deploying the following resources for distribution to impacted areas:
6 barges are aiding in the delivery of commodities in Lee County to Pine Island and Sanibel Island. Barge missions successfully continued to support critical infrastructure restoration and fuel supply.
Trailers for restrooms, showers, laundry, sleeping and sanitation to ensure the care of first responders in the field.
More than 4,000 gallons of diesel to Lee County to power water plants that provide water to nearby hospitals.
Drone teams to assess flooded areas.
2 full-service mechanical shops.
500,000 tarps.
375 kits for parents of infants and toddlers with critical supplies that will last for 10 days each.
Coordinating the provision of meals for first responders staged in Orange County.
FDEM is in constant communication with all 67 county emergency management offices and state agencies to coordinate recovery actions and needed resources.
Power
Power has been restored to all accounts on the mainland which can receive it.
As of today, over 95% of accounts that can receive power on Pine Island have been restored, significantly ahead of the estimated restoration timeline.
For a full report on current outages, click here.
Health and Human Services
Boil Water Notices have been issued for 80 areas in 17 counties, following the impacts from Hurricane Ian. DOH continues to monitor and maintain a comprehensive statewide list of notices for residents to access online.
The Division of Disease Control and Health Protection continues to provide technical and field support to environmental health strike teams and staff by distributing environmental health information.
Deployed staff have packed nearly 1,000 waterproof bags with essential supplies for moms and babies to be distributed to families in impacted communities.
DOH County Health Departments have been deployed to all Disaster Recovery Centers to provide services and resources. This includes Women and Infant Care, Vital Statistics, and other public health services. Costs for any vital statistics, such as birth and death certificates, have been waived.
DOH assisted with the relocation of a U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) mobile lab to Seminole County. EPA's lab is analyzing water samples for community water systems, and private well samples received from DOH.
DOH's Division of Children's Medical Services' Early Steps and Newborn Screening programs has sent additional supplies to Ft. Myers. Supplies include hand sanitizer, silicone bibs, thermometers, baby spoons, and cooling towels. This will be package in Moms and Babies' waterproof bags and distributed to individuals in need.
Hope Heroes are volunteering in shelters, helping clean yard debris and tarping roofs for seniors. To become a Hope Hero and volunteer to help older Floridians, visit helpcreatehope.com.
Visits are being conducted at all health care facilities in counties impacted by Hurricane Ian. AHCA has completed 615 assessments at facilities in Brevard, Broward, Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Hardee, Highlands, Hillsborough, Lake, Lee, Manatee, Miami-Dade, Orange, Osceola, Palm Beach, Sarasota, Seminole, Volusia.
102 clients have received weather-related Emergency Home Assistance for the Elder Program funds to assist with individuals experiencing a home energy emergency in the affected areas.
1 special needs shelter remains open, serving 19 clients. This shelter will be phased out as clients return to their homes or identify long term housing solutions
DOH's Children's Medical Services Plan and partners have setup 4 locations (one in DeSoto, Sarasota and Orange counties, and two locations in Lee County) for individuals to receive free hygiene and infant supplies, in addition to other essentials. All sites are open to the public.
DeSoto County First Christian Church located at 34 El Verano Ave., Arcadia, Florida 34266. Hours of operation are Noon to 6 p.m.
Lee County Family Initiative located at 734 SW 4th St., Cape Coral, Florida 33991. Hours of operation are 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Lee County Sunshine Fort Myers located at 4901 Palm Beach Blvd., Fort Myers, FL 33905. Hours of operation are 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Sarasota County Sarasota Christian Church located at 2923 Ashton Road, Sarasota, FL 34231. Hours of operation are 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Infrastructure
All accessible State-owned bridges have been inspected across Florida. FDOT continues to assist with inspections on locally owned bridges.
97% of cut and toss operations are complete statewide
100% of cut and toss operations are complete in Lee County.
100% of cut and toss operations are complete in Charlotte County.
Access restored to Pine Island Bridge in just over 50 hours/ under 3 days.
Construction has begun on the Sanibel Causeway.
Florida Tolls reinstated at 6 a.m. on Saturday, October 15, with the exception of Alligator Alley, Pinellas Bayway, and Sunshine Skyway. Tolls at those three facilities remain suspended.
Initial debris pick-up:
3,966 miles of state roads have been completed statewide.
Statewide 58,586 cubic yards of vegetation debris have been picked up.
Bridges (state roads and interstates)
Bridges Closed as of 11 a.m. on 10/15/22
Sanibel Causeway (Lee County)
Roadways (state roads and interstates)
Roads Closed as of 11 a.m. on 10/15/22
Brevard County
SR-46 Westbound at Hatbill Road Lane closed
Charlotte County
Bridge closed on Rotonda Boulevard both directions at Rotonda Boulevard South
DeSoto County
NW 2nd Bunker Avenue at Arrowhead Pond Road Lane closed, both directions
SR-72 Westbound beyond SR-70 All lanes closed
SR-72 from NW Pearce Street to SR-70 Lane closed
Hardee County
N Hollandtown Road at Thoroughbred Road Lane closed, both directions
SR-64 from Brantwood Drive to Wilbur C King Boulevard Lane closed, both directions
Highlands County
Golfview Road at Lake Drive Boulevard Lane closed, both directions
Marble Avenue from W Martin Road to S Lake Boulevard Lane closed, both directions
Lee County
Sanibel Causeway
Bonita Beach Road at Simmons Lane All lanes closed
Captiva Drive from Palmflower Lane to Sanibel Captiva Road Lane closed, both directions
CR-865 at Broadway Channel Lane closed, both directions
CR-865 from Estrellita Drive to Cape Hickory Court Lane closed, both directions
CR-867 Southbound from Port Comfort Road to Punta Rassa Road All lanes closed
Estero Boulevard at Broadway Channel Lane closed, both directions
Polk County
E Grove Avenue at S Scenic Highway Lane closed, both directions
Seminole County
SR-46 Eastbound at N Jungle Road Lane closed
Freight Rail
Seminole Gulf Railway sustained significant damage. Damage assessments continue and repair plans are underway. They are operating on their Sarasota line.
Passenger Rail
Amtrak: operations have returned to normal service apart from Silver Star trains #91/92, which suspended rail service beyond Jacksonville. A bus bridge will be provided to Orlando, Tampa, and Miami, Florida
SunRail: Full service will return to all stations Today- Monday, October 17.
Mass Care
DOEA has partnered with organizations to ensure resources are delivered to older Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian.
DCF launched the Disaster Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (D-SNAP), which is being implemented in phases by county. Phase one includes Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Hardee, Lee, Polk, and Sarasota counties. Pre-registration is required by all applicants. As of October 16, 94,525 households have pre-registered. To expedite service to eligible households, DCF is offering phone interviews through the D-SNAP Call Center. Details can be found online at MyFLFamilies.com/DSNAP.
DCF has released more than $50 million in mass replacements of SNAP benefits to household who did not receive early release benefits. More information can be found at MyFLFamilies.com/HurricaneIan.
DBPR investigators and other staffers from across the state are at all the Disaster Recovery Centers in Charlotte, Collier, Lee and Sarasota Counties, helping with any licensing needs and educating the public about the importance of hiring a licensed contractor.
The Area Agency on Aging of Pasco-Pinellas County has worked with Amazon to get $13,000 in donated gift cards for seniors in affected areas.
DCF has two new Family Resource Support Centers in Deltona and New Smyrna Beach. FRSCs are staffed with Hope Navigators, crisis counselors who specialize in disaster recovery response, and public benefit eligibility specialists to help individuals and families. More information can be found at MyFLFamilies.com/FRSC.
DCF released $235,351,849 in early SNAP benefits to a household population of approximately 773,579 people at risk of impact for Hurricane Ian. More information can be found here: ACCESS Florida Florida Department of Children and Families (myflfamilies.com)
Florida Housing Finance Corporation has updated its Disaster Relief webpage to provide families with information on housing resources and assistance. This webpage will continue to be updated as more information becomes available. Disaster Relief Resources and Information (floridahousing.org).
Florida Housing has ensured that all current listings are up to date in the event that families need to quickly relocate at www.FloridaHousingSearch.org.
Each SHIP office has an adopted disaster strategy that allows for assistance in the immediate aftermath of a declared disaster. Strategies may include temporary relocation and rental assistance, debris removal and short-term repairs to prevent further damage to the structure or to allow for occupancy until further repairs are made. Please contact your local office directly for more information: Local Government Information (floridahousing.org)
Law Enforcement
FHP's Quick Reaction Force (QRF) is operating on 12-hour Alpha, Bravo shifts as they continue missions in the impacted areas.
A second wave of 120 troopers has deployed to impacted areas to relieve initial QRF teams.
FLHSMV has deployed Florida Licensing on Wheels (FLOW) mobile units to Lee, Charlotte, Sarasota, and Collier counties to provide no-fee replacements for driver license and identification credentials, vehicle registrations, and titles.
Dates, locations, and hours of operation for FLOW mobiles are subject to change and will be announced on FLHSMV.gov
FLOW Locations:
Sarasota County
Disaster Recovery Center
Shannon Staub Library
4675 Career Lane, North Port, FL 34289
Lee County
Disaster Recovery Center
Lakes Regional Library
15290 Bass Road, Fort Myers, FL 33919
Hertz Arena
11000 Everblades Parkway, Estero, FL 33928
Disaster Recovery Center
Joseph P. D'Alessandro Office Complex
2295 Victoria Ave., Ft. Myers, FL 33901
Charlotte County
Port Charlotte Town Center
1441 Tamiami Trail, Port Charlotte, FL 33948
Collier County
Disaster Recovery Center
Veterans Community Park
1895 Veterans Park Dr, Naples, FL 34110
ORANGE COUNTY
Disaster Recovery Center
Barnett Park
4801 W Colonial Dr., Orlando, FL 32808
(Oct. 16-18 only)
o FLOW Hours of Operation: 9:00am 6:00pm, seven days a week
As of October 16, more than 4,100 customers have been served since operations began.
FDLE is coordinating 360 missions including supporting local law enforcement agencies in the impacted areas with patrol, traffic control and security.
FDLE has four response teams and one logistical support team deployed in Lee and Charlotte counties checking in law enforcement officers reporting for duty, maintaining the base camps and matching law enforcement resources to the identified needs.
FDLE's mutual aid team is supporting 300 hurricane response missions.
FDLE is preparing for a second wave of law enforcement deployments relieving those who have been deployed since last week.
FDLE staging areas are open in Southwest Florida and Hardee County at the Lee County Sports Complex, Weigh Station Mile Marker 161 in Charlotte County and in Hardee, at the Civic Center in Wauchula. All deployed law enforcement officers in these areas should check in at one of these staging areas for work assignments.
More than 100 FDLE agents are deployed in Southwest Florida assisting with traffic control, security needs and law enforcement check-ins.
FDLE established telephone lines for Fort Myers regional law enforcement coordination team.
FDLE's base camp in Lee County is fully operational serving first responders deployed to the area. Base camps include meal service, sleeping quarters, showers, laundry and restroom facilities.
FHP continues to assist FDOT with bridge and road closures across impacted areas.
FHP's fixed-wing aircraft and unmanned aerial systems are aiding in FDOT's efforts as they continue to undertake bridge and other infrastructure repairs.
FHP continues to provide escorts for fuel, utility, and emergency response teams to provide critical resources to the impacted areas.
FHP is assisting multiple local agencies with law enforcement functions in the impacted areas.
FHP has deployed mobile command centers to the State Emergency Operations Center and southwest Florida to provide enhanced communication capabilities and additional resources.
More than 1,700 sworn FHP members are available to assist with enhanced response efforts.
Peer support is available 24/7 to all FHP members and their families through FHP's Peer Support Team and the FHP Wellness App to support their overall wellness.
FHP encourages motorists to report disabled vehicles or dangerous driving conditions to *FHP (*347).
FLHSMV driver license and motor vehicle service center closures can be found here.
FLHSMV has issued Emergency Order 092422, which:
Waives specific requirements for commercial motor vehicles providing emergency relief; and
Waives the replacement fees for driver's license and identification credentials, vehicle registrations and titles, vessel registrations and titles and temporary parking permits for impacted individuals.
FWC has established a field base of operations in Lee County and deployed two mobile command centers and 6 BERG units to provide communications and operational support to officers in the area while they respond to calls for assistance.
A total of approximately 67 FWC officers and support personnel are currently deployed for Hurricane Ian response and recovery efforts.
51 FWC officers and 1 vehicle and vessel mechanic with a full complement of four-wheel drive vehicles, vessels and response and recovery equipment and supplies are based in Lee County.
15 FWC officers from across the state have deployed to assess and process thousands of vessels displaced due to the storm.
FWC officers are conducting 24-hour land-based and waterborne safety and security patrols around Sanibel Island and other barrier islands to protect people and property on the islands.
FWC officers are using vessels to transport additional rescue personnel, supplies and equipment to all affected barrier islands inaccessible to vehicles, including Sanibel, Captiva and Pine Island.
FWC Aviation Section is providing the State EOC with aerial assistance, reconnaissance and post-storm damage assessments.
More than 350 captive wildlife facilities have been assessed.
FWC, in conjunction with state and federal partners, is standing up a Unified Command to address the large numbers of displaced vessels in the aftermath of Hurricane Ian.
If a vessel owner is removing their vessel, they should notify the Hurricane Ian Vessel Hotline of their plans for vessel removal by calling 850-488-5600 M-F, 8 a.m. 5 p.m.
If your vessel is missing, you have located a vessel or have questions about displaced vessels or vessels in state waters that have been rendered derelict by Hurricane Ian, you are encouraged to call the Hurricane Ian Vessel Hotline M-F, 8 a.m. 5 p.m. at 850-488-5600.
FWC cautions all boaters to exercise extreme caution in waterways in areas affected by Hurricane Ian and encourages boaters to report missing or damaged waterway markers by calling 866-405-2869 or by filling out an online form at: https://myfwc.com/boating/waterway/markers/damaged-ormissing/.
Private Sector Support
Florida was approved for $30 million for the National Dislocated Worker Grant for Floridians without work due to Hurricane Ian, which DEO applied for through the U.S. Department of Labor on October 4, 2022.
Florida Housing Search is a free, state resource for renters and property managers in Florida. Dynamic search options can help renters find available rental housing that fits a variety of needs and incomes. The Florida Housing Finance Corporation is verifying that all listings are up to date in the event that families need to quickly relocate.
Uber is offering free round-trip rides, up to $30 each way, to and from 10 state-approved Disaster Recovery Centers (DRC). At these centers, those whose livelihoods have been severely affected by Hurricane Ian will be able to apply for federal assistance and disaster loans, update applications, and learn about other resources available. Details on how to redeem a free round trip, up to $30 each way, to and from a state-approved DRC are available at www.FloridaDisaster.biz/CurrentDisasterUpdates.
Business Recovery Centers, represented by the U.S. Small Business Administration and the Florida Small Business Development Center network. Visit www.FloridaSBDC.org/disaster/loan-assistance/ to find a location near you.
Work search reporting and other requirements for Reemployment Assistance claims have been temporarily waived for Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian in FEMA disaster-declared counties. Eligible Floridians must file for regular state Reemployment Assistance benefits before applying for Disaster Unemployment Assistance (DUA). DUA is available for individuals and businesses in FEMA disaster-declared counties. Learn more here.
Over 13,400 DUA claims have been submitted since DUA was activated and more than 6,400 have been approved.
To support Floridians during this time, DEO has deployed personnel to the field and extended call center hours to seven days per week. Additionally, DEO secured six ID.me kiosks and support technicians to reduce the number of fraudulent claims. DEO is expanding the number of agents available to review and process claims.
All these efforts are focused on reducing the processing time so DUA benefits can be expedited to Floridians in need.
DEO and CareerSource Florida are mobilizing resources from other Local Workforce Development Boards and activating the disaster recovery jobs portal to connect businesses and people impacted by Hurricane Ian with workforce programs. To look for employment opportunities or post disaster-related jobs to help rebuild Florida's communities impacted by Hurricane Ian, visit Florida's Disaster Recovery Jobs Portal at disasterrecovery.employflorida.com.
CareerSource Florida is working with DEO to support recovery efforts and help connect affected residents with temporary employment and other recovery assistance. All career centers are open statewide. To find your local career center, visit Find Your Local Team or Career Center Directory.
CareerSource Southwest Florida centers in Fort Myers, Immokalee, Clewiston, Naples, Port Charlotte are open and operational Monday Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Information on disaster recovery resources and mobile career center locations are available at www.careersourcesouthwestflorida.com/disaster-recovery-information/.
CareerSource South Florida and CareerSource Pasco Hernando locations have deployed mobile units to the Fort Myers Disaster Recovery Center.
CareerSource Southwest Florida has deployed volunteers to the Disaster Recovery Center to assist impacted individuals.
The Florida Small Business Emergency Bridge Loan Program has been activated to assist small businesses that have been impacted by Hurricane Ian with short-term, zero-interest loans to meet the businesses' immediate financial needs and "bridge the gap" until longer term funding sources become available. Small businesses in the most impacted counties will be escalated and prioritized as they are received. Visit www.FloridaJobs.org/EBL to learn more.
DEO is updating www.FloridaDisaster.biz with real-time information for business owners, their families, and employees for Hurricane Ian.
DEO's Rebuild Florida team continues to work with homeowners to assess any damage that may have occurred to Hurricane Irma projects from Hurricane Ian. The team continues to rotate deployed staff to Ian-impacted areas, supporting recovery efforts.
DEO's Secretary Dane Eagle distributed a memo on Tuesday, September 27, 2022, releasing $1.4 million in Low-Income Home Energy Assistant Program (LIHEAP) set-aside emergency funding for use by LIHEAP providers across the state to support preparedness activities such as transportation and temporary housing to preserve health and safety.
VISIT FLORIDA has activated its Emergency Accommodations Module on Expedia to provide real-time hotel availability and lodging resources for impacted Floridians and visitors.
Enterprise Florida activated its Disaster Assistance page with a list of state and federal resources available for businesses to utilize in their mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery activities.
Enterprise Florida hosted its second Hurricane Ian Response Meeting with economic development partners, as well as representatives from utilities, about various needs they are facing, county recovery plans, and resources available to help those in need.
DEO has deployed team members and five mobile units, with more on the way, to Hurricane Ian-impacted areas this week to support recovery efforts.
ATandT is waiving talk, text, and data overage charges for ATandT Postpaid and PREPAID customers with billing addresses in 828 zip codes across Florida from September 28, 2022, through October 28, 2022, to keep customers connected before, during and after any major storm event. ATandT is welcoming other carriers' customers to roam on its networks so they can connect, even if their carrier's service isn't available after the storm. Since opening the ATandT network last week for roaming, we've handled about 47 TBs of traffic from other carriers to help keep those in impacted areas connected. 47 TBs of data is equal to more than 16 billion text messages. Store locations and hours are available at www.att.com/stores.
ATandT and the ATandT Foundation are donating $400,000 to organizations supporting restoration work in the wake of Hurricane Ian; $200,000 to the Florida Disaster Fund (www.volunteerflorida.org), $100,000 to the Information Technology Disaster Resource Center (www.itdrc.org) and $100,000 to SBPUSA (www.sbpusa.org).
Comcast has Xfinity WiFi vans provide free internet connectivity as communities continue to recover from Hurricane Ian. Each Xfinity WiFi van can provide wireless internet connectivity to more than 1,000 users at one time over a 300-square-foot area. The vans will be available from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily at the following locations until further notice:
Cape Coral: Walmart Supercenter, 1619 Del Prado Boulevard South, Cape Coral, FL
Bonita Springs: Bonita Springs Public Library, 2687 Pine Ave., Bonita Springs, FL
Fort Myers: Walmart Supercenter, 17105 San Carlos Blvd., Fort Myers, FL
Port Charlotte: Walmart Neighborhood Market (Charlotte Square) at 2150 Tamiami Trail, Port Charlotte, FL
As residents of Southwest Florida continue to recover, Verizon is extending its support for counties most impacted by Hurricane Ian. Consumer and small business customers in the following counties will continue to receive unlimited calling, texting, and mobile data through October 31, 2022, in Charlotte, Collier, Desoto, Hardee, Lee, and Sarasota counties. Verizon has deployed three Wireless Emergency Connection Centers (WECCs) to assist Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian with wi-fi, phone batteries, and charging stations. These stations are available to any customer of any carrier stay connected. WECCs are available at the following locations:
Port Charlotte Town Center Mall, 1441 Tamiami Trail, Port Charlotte, FL (open 10:00 a.m. 6:00 p.m.)
Fort Myers Town Hall, 2525 Estero Boulevard, Fort Myers Beach, FL (open 8:00 a.m. 5:00 p.m.)
Lakes Regional Library 15290 Bass Road, Fort Myers, FL (open 9:00 a.m. 6:00 p.m.)
Fishers of Men Lutheran Church, 10360 Stringfellow Rd, St James City, FL (open 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily)
Additionally, charging pedestals are available at the following locations:
Estero Community Center, 9200 Corkscrew Palms Boulevard, Estero, FL 33928
Hertz Arena, 11000 Everblades Parkway, Estero, FL 33928
North Collier Regional Park, 15000 Livingston Road, Naples, FL 34116
2817 Southwest 3rd Lane, Cape Coral, FL 33991
1029 Diplomat Parkway East, Cape Coral, FL 33909
1410 Sports Blvd, Cape Coral, FL 33991
1039 Burnt Store Road, Cape Coral, FL 33993
Airbnb has launched a special website to help Hurricane Ian Relocation efforts for impacted residents at Airbnb.com/hurricaneianflorida. The page features open (vacant and available for rent) properties that are available to be booked outside of the FEMA Disaster zones. As communities become fully restored with water and electricity, Airbnb will add more open properties.
For displaced residents of Lee and Charlotte counties, Airbnb is also working with their nonprofit partners to offer vouchers for temporary housing at Airbnb properties. To learn more about how the voucher program works, see Airbnb's full press release at https://news.airbnb.com/airbnb-org-hurricane-relief-efforts/.
DEO staff and volunteers are providing in-person services and surging resources to five Disaster Recover Center locations located in Lee, Charlotte, Sarasota, and Collier Counties. Locations for DRCs are available on www.FloridaDisaster.org.
Business Recovery Centers, represented by the U.S. Small Business Administration and the Florida Small Business Development Center network, are stationed at the following locations:
Chloe Coney Urban Enterprise Center, 1907 E Hillsborough Avenue, Tampa, FL (open Monday Friday from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.; open Saturday from 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.)
The HUB at SWFL INC, 25071 Chamber of Commerce Drive, Bonita Springs, FL (open Monday Sunday from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.)
The Naples Players, 701 5th Avenue South, Naples FL (open Monday from 9:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. and Tuesday Sunday from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.)
Sanford Information Center, 30 E 1st Street, Sanford, FL (open Monday Sunday from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.)
The Kiwanis Club, 360 Santa Barbara Boulevard South, Cape Coral, FL (opens at 10:00 a.m. on Monday, October 10, 2022)
Florida Department of Education (DOE)
All school districts impacted by Hurricane Ian will be open by Tuesday, October 18, less than three weeks after Hurricane Ian made landfall. More info can be found here.
Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
DEP is coordinating with FWC and USCG on derelict/displaced vessels.
DEP has activated a Waste Hotline for local governments and established a dedicated email account for county debris/waste assistance.
DEP landfill strike team members along with EPA On-Scene Coordinator staff continue DDMS/Debris inspections.
294 Disaster Debris Management Sites have been authorized to operate for Hurricane Ian, including 67 in Lee, Charlotte and Sarasota counties. These sites are a critical component of expediting clean-up, reducing environmental and public health impacts, and meeting federal reimbursement requirements.
DEP staff are on the ground assessing water and wastewater infrastructure on some of the hardest hit areas Fort Myers Beach, Pine Island, Sanibel Island and Gasparilla Island, with resources from FlaWARN, US Army Corps of Engineers, local utilities and the Division of Emergency Management's contractor.
Beaches staff continue to conduct beach surveys to assess erosion and vulnerability in impacted areas.
DEP is coordinating with FlaWARN and other response agencies on the dispatch of generators, fuel and pump trucks to assist drinking water and wastewater facilities to help get them operational as soon as possible.
Hazardous Area Response Teams have been deployed to aid with assessment and resources for addressing impacts to hazardous waste facilities in impacted areas.
Following the issuance of the Governor's Executive Order, DEP issued an Emergency Final Order waiving permitting requirements for the storage and processing of solid waste, including storm debris.
DEP has also issued an Emergency Final Order to expedite necessary repair, replacement and restoration of structures, equipment, surface water management systems, works and other systems damaged by the storm.
Nine Florida State Parks strike teams have been assembled to assist with assessment and recovery efforts at impacted parks. Five teams are on the ground today in impacted areas. Other teams will be deployed as conditions allow and needs are identified.
Resource Management
Reviewed the debris removal requirements for the Fort Myers service center vacant lot.
Forwarded electric transformer manufacturers to ESF 12 (Energy) for the availability of restoration equipment.
Continued to follow up for revised quote and terms for equipment rentals.
Maintained contact with vendors for requested quotes to conclude requests for commodities.
Charlotte County sheltering requirements have been sent to the Division of Real Estate Development and Management for sourcing.
Licensing
DBPR Secretary Melanie S. Griffin is accompanying our Division of Regulation team in Charlotte County as they sweep neighborhoods assessing whether there is damage and looking for unlicensed contracting.
DOH's Board of Clinical Social Work, Marriage and Family Therapy, and Mental Health Counseling is increasing resources to expedite processing of licensure applications, ensuring greater availability of qualified mental health professionals.
DBPR Emergency Order 2022-04 waives the application fees associated with relocating or reopening certain businesses, including the addition of branch locations regulated by the Department or by any board, commission or division of the Department, where relocation or reopening arises from damages caused by Hurricane Ian in the listed counties.
DBPR Emergency Order 2022-03 waives the requirement for certified or registered, general, building, or residential contractors to subcontract roofing work for the repair or installation of any roof type in listed counties.
The emergency order clarifies that the installation of non-permanent, emergency tarps to relieve damage caused by Hurricane Ian fall within the exemptions listed in section 489.103(6).
Temporary Veterinarian License Application: The Florida Board of Veterinary Medicine has a 30-Day Temporary Veterinarian License available to out-of-state veterinarians who do not currently hold a Florida Veterinary License but wish to come to Florida to provide relief veterinary services.
Florida licensed veterinarians interested in offering volunteer services should contact the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Florida Vet Corp for information at 1-800-HELP-FLA (1-800-435-7352).
Food Industry Bulletins: DBPR has published Emergency Recovery Guidelines and Boil Water Notice Guidelines on our website, and DBPR's Division of Hotels and Restaurants is distributing the notices to licensed businesses in impacted areas.
DBPR Emergency Order 2022-01 extends the renewal deadline from September 30 or October 1, 2022, to October 31, 2022, for the multiple licenses.
Licenses renewed on or before October 31, 2022 shall be considered as timely renewals and will not be assessed any late fees.
DBPR Emergency Order 2022-01 also extends the deadline for the filing of monthly reports and returns by certain alcoholic beverage and tobacco license holders from October 10, 2022, to October 31, 2022. Additionally, the order suspends and tolls through October 31, 2022, all final orders reflecting final agency action and all time requirements and deadlines for filing responses outlined in agency orders.
DBPR Board Meeting cancellations and other updates can be found at http://myfloridalicense.com/emergency.
DBPR's Division of Drugs, Devices and Cosmetics is coordinating with wholesale distributors of prescription drugs and medical gases to provide information and support relating to exceptions for the emergency distribution of these critical supplies where needed.
Insurance
OIR is requiring insurers to report preliminary catastrophe claims for Hurricane Ian. To date, insurers have reported a total of $ 5,875,767,426 in estimated insured losses and a total of 533,837 claims. This aggregate information is compiled from claims data filed by insurers, it has not been audited or independently verified. Additional claim data and information can be found on OIR's Hurricane Ian information page here.
The Department of Revenue announced extended due dates for corporate income tax filers impacted by Hurricane Ian following the recent declaration from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). Eligible taxpayers that file Florida corporate income tax returns, as well as Florida corporate income tax installment payments, with original due dates or extended due dates falling on or after September 23, 2022 and before March 2, 2023 will now have a due date of March 2, 2023. This tax relief is applicable to affected businesses anywhere in Florida. Taxpayers needing assistance with corporate income tax filing may contact DOR's Taxpayer Assistance at (850) 488-6800 or GTAHurricaneHelp@floridarevenue.com
OIR issued Emergency Order 300997-22-EO in response to Hurricane Ian regarding the extension of grace periods, limitations on cancellations and nonrenewals, deemers and limitations on "use and file" filings. This Emergency Order is issued to protect the public health, safety and welfare of all Florida policyholders.
OIR instituted a data call for the purpose of collecting catastrophe claims data related to Hurricane Ian. OIR is requiring daily catastrophe claims reporting for Hurricane Ian starting Friday, September 30 to assist with determining the impact of Hurricane Ian on Florida's insurance industry. More information regarding catastrophe claims data and reporting is available here.
Florida Main Street Program
The Florida Department of State, Division of Historical Resources', Florida Main Street Program has been in contact with Florida Main Street communities before and after Hurricane Ian to mitigate damage to the communities and historic properties in these communities.
Florida Main Street has dispersed information to communities including recovery resources, volunteer assistance, Small Business Association Loan opening and disaster assistance information in disaster declaration areas.
Additionally, The Florida Main Street Program has paired up communities that were affected by Hurricane Ian with mentors who were successful in rehabilitation after Hurricane Michael to provide pragmatic experience about ways to move forward and recover after disaster.
Elections Update
At the request of the Supervisors of Elections in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties, and at the recommendation of Secretary of State Cord Byrd, the Governor signed Executive Order 22-234, which will help ensure adequate access to Florida's 2022 General Election ballot for the voters of Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties.
The Governor's Executive Order includes provisions authorizing the Supervisors of Elections in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties to:
Extend the number of days for early voting and designate additional early voting locations. The early voting period may begin as early as Monday, October 24, 2022, and can extend through Election Day, November 8, 2022.
Allow voters in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties to request by phone that their vote-by-mail (VBM) ballot be mailed to an address other than their address of record. Voters must still provide an appropriate form of identification in the same manner as absent uniform service and overseas voters.
Designate and provide notice of the locations for secure ballot intake stations and relocate and consolidate polling locations as necessary.
Increase the pool of eligible poll workers who may serve within Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties by making eligible any poll workers previously trained for the 2020 election cycle and thereafter and by encouraging state employees to serve as poll workers in these counties.
Governor DeSantis also directed all state agencies to render aid and assistance as needed by the Supervisors of Elections in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties. Secretary Byrd and the Department of State assessed the need for these provisions based on extensive outreach to Florida's Supervisors of Elections:
Secretary Byrd and the Division of Elections leadership conducted continuous outreach and assessed the needs and readiness of counties in or around Hurricane Ian's path, including: Charlotte, Citrus, Collier, DeSoto, Dixie, Flagler, Gilchrist, Hardee, Hernando, Highlands, Hillsborough, Lafayette, Lake, Lee, Levy, Manatee, Orange, Osceola, Pasco, Pinellas, Polk, Putnam, Sarasota, Seminole, St. Johns, Taylor, and Volusia counties. Secretary Byrd also personally visited the hardest hit areas, including Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Lee, Hardee, and Sarasota counties to meet with their Supervisors of Elections in-person.
Furthermore, Secretary Byrd participated in discussions with the Florida Supervisors of Elections (FSE). The FSE is a nonprofit association representing the Supervisors of Elections from all of Florida's 67 counties.
Lastly, since Hurricane Ian made landfall, numerous Supervisors of Elections have publicly addressed their readiness, and thankfully most have very publicly stated that Ian's impacts will not interfere with their duties. This is a testament to the resiliency of Florida's elections system.
Office Closures
DOH in Lee County is the only county still experiencing closures due to Hurricane Ian. An alternate location for services is being identified so in-person services can resume as quickly as possible. Some services are available at the Michigan Clinic, and remainder of clients are being served remotely or through other locations.
State facilities closed can be found at dms.myflorida.com/buildingclosures and the Florida DMS Emergency Information Hotline at 888-336-7345.
###
Load-Date: October 17, 2022



End of Document


IN CASE YOU MISSED IT: GOVERNOR RON DESANTIS ISSUES UPDATES ON HURRICANE IAN RECOVERY
US Fed News
October 17, 2022 Monday 8:31 PM  EST

Copyright 2022 HT Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Length: 7826 words
Body




TALLAHASSEE, Fla., Oct. 17 -- The Florida Department of Environmental Protection issued the following news release:
TALLAHASSEE, Fla.- Today,Governor Ron DeSantis visited Toledo Blade Elementary in North Port on the first day back in session following Hurricane Ian. While there, the Governor announced over $200 million in awards through the School Recognition Program to 1,400 schools across the state that have demonstrated student growth and teaching excellence. In Southwest Florida, 96 schools received $13 million from this program. To watch the Governor's full remarks, click here.
Yesterday, Governor DeSantis was in Flagler County to receive a briefing from local officials and survey areas impacted by Hurricane Ian. Since Hurricane Ian, the state has supported recovery efforts in Flagler County by working with the Florida National Guard to provide high-water vehicles for search and rescue efforts, delivering 20 septic pump trucks to remove wastewater and providing safety signage for water on roadways. The Governor also announced the approval of Florida's Dislocated Worker Grant Request.
Today, First Lady Casey DeSantis highlighted the Florida Disaster Fund and the support it has received from private entities across the nation. The Florida Disaster Fund has raised over $45 million since activation. To read more, clickhere. To contribute, please visitwww.FloridaDisasterFund.orgor text DISASTER to 20222.
Additionally, the First Lady has worked with the State Disaster Recovery Mental Health Coordinator, Sara Newhouse, to compile a webpage of resources to help first responders navigate resources for mental health needs post hurricane. To visit the site, clickhere. Mental health resources for individuals and communities are available atMyFLFamilies.com/HurricaneIan. Floridians' health and well-being are a top priority, and the Department of Children and Families is reminding individuals that they are not alone. All Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian can find someone to talk to today through theDisaster Distress Helplineby calling 800-985-5990.
Additional programs that have been put into place to aid communities include the activation ofthe Florida Small Business Emergency Bridge Loan Program, the initiation of theArmy Corps of Engineers' Operation Blue Roof, and FDOT's diligent work to construct temporary bridges into areas that are cut off from motorists. First Lady Casey DeSantis, Volunteer Florida and Tervis have created a design with Florida imagery for a new tumbler product. With every sale of this tumbler, all proceeds will go to the Florida Disaster Fund. Products are available for purchase on the Tervis websiteHEREand will soon be available in stores for purchase.
If you are an Xfinity customer experiencing internet connectivity issues and you live in a predominately restored location and find that after restarting your modem your services are still not working, the lines delivering service to your home may be damaged. Please go to theStatus Centerto troubleshoot or use yourXfinity Appto chat with a representative or call 1-800-XFINITY (1-800-934-6489) to report your service interruption.
State response efforts include:
Search and Rescue
* There have been 2,500 rescues made to date.
* More than 1,000 team members performed search and rescue.
* DCF has created a First Responder Support Line (407-823-1657) that all first responders throughout the impacted areas can contact. This line combines current resources into a single point of contact that will connect first responders with mental health professionals.
* The State Disaster Recovery Mental Health Coordinator created asurveyto assess the need for mental health services for Hurricane Ian first responders.
* Following Governor DeSantis' authorization, Joint Task Force Florida has 4,351 personnel activated and is executing missions in response to Hurricane Ian. The Florida National Guard has supported a total of 246 missions.
* Task Force engineering resources have been deployed to assist with route clearance in Pine Island and Charlotte County. The Florida National Guard has cleared 51.5 miles to date in the impacted area. Guardsmen continue to assist law enforcement with roving patrols, security, traffic control and curfew enforcement missions.
Florida Division of Emergency Management (FDEM)
* At the request of Governor DeSantis, FDEM worked with federal partners to secure an additional 30 days of 100% federal cost share for Public Assistance Category A (debris removal) and Category B (emergency protective measures) for Hurricane Ian recovery efforts. More information can be foundhere.
* Counties eligible for FEMA Individual Assistance include Brevard, Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Flagler, Glades, Hardee, Hendry, Highlands, Hillsborough, Lake, Lee, Manatee, Monroe, Okeechobee, Orange, Osceola, Palm Beach, Pasco, Pinellas, Polk, Putnam, Sarasota, Seminole, St. Johns and Volusia. Impacted residents can apply at DisasterAssistance.gov. As of October 17, there were 607,019 valid registrations with over $453 million approved.
* FDEM has worked with FEMA to activate the Transitional Sheltering Assistance (TSA) Program for impacted residents in counties declared for FEMA Individual Assistance. FDEM will continue to work with FEMA to determine additional unmet needs for residents in newly declared counties for Individual Assistance. Individuals can apply for disaster assistance and may be eligible for TSA if they cannot return to their home.
* USACE debris removal Subject Matter Experts are coordinating with city and county personnel to conduct volume estimates and mission analysis for debris removal in impacted areas.
* The Crisis Cleanup Line,800-451-1954, provides debris removal services to impacted residents, and has completed more than 1,000 requests to date.
* In coordination with federal and state partners, more than 100 pets have been rescued through air operations from the Barrier Islands.
* Under State Coordinating Officer Kevin Guthrie, members of the Forward SERT have deployed to Southwest Florida to coordinate recovery efforts on scene.
* More than 14 million meals and 51 million bottles of water have been distributed so far.
* All PODs have been closed as of October 13.
* More than 308,000 bags of ice have been distributed throughout the state.
* FDEM is working with feeding partners to operate kitchens for impacted and displaced residents. More than 2.4 million hot meals have been served since volunteer kitchens opened.
* FDEM is coordinating with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to conduct infrastructure assessments of water treatment plants, wastewater treatment plants, and assisted living facilities.
* Through the Emergency Management Assistance Compact (EMAC), more than 1,800 personnel from 26 states have deployed to Florida to assist in response and recovery efforts.
* FDEM has activated the State Assistance Information Line (SAIL) to provide an additional resource for Floridians to receive up-to-date information regarding Hurricane Ian. Residents and visitors can call this toll-free hotline at1-800-342-3557.
* FDEM maintains 8 fuel depots across Central and Southwest Florida to provide fuel for first responders. A public, mobile fuel depot is open at the Wa-Ke Hatchee Recreation Center and Park in Harlem Heights to provide fuel for vehicles and gas cans for generators to impacted residents.
* FDEM has received more than 6,382 resource requests for Hurricane Ian and fulfilled. More than 3600 requests have been completed and approximately 1800 being processed and are either in route or being mobilized. This includes the coordination of resources such as: trucks of food and water, generators and tarps.
* FDEM is mobilizing pet food and supplies for displaced pets, including: rabies vaccines, dry and canned dog food, dry and canned cat food, cat litter, disposable pet bowls and disposable leashes.
* 120 critical lift stations at wastewater treatment plants have been brought back online in Lee County through the utilization of generators and/or pumps.
* FDEM has deployed the State Mental Health Coordinator to connect with community providers, voluntary organizations, first responder support agencies, and state agency partners to identify and address mental health needs within the affected communities.
* FDEM is deploying the following resources for distribution to impacted areas:
* 6 barges are aiding in the delivery of commodities in Lee County to Pine Island and Sanibel Island. Barge missions successfully continued to support critical infrastructure restoration and fuel supply.
* Trailers for restrooms, showers, laundry, sleeping and sanitation to ensure the care of first responders in the field.
* More than 4,000 gallons of diesel to Lee County to power water plants that provide water to nearby hospitals.
* Drone teams to assess flooded areas.
* 2 full-service mechanical shops.
* 500,000 tarps.
* 375 kits for parents of infants and toddlers with critical supplies that will last for 10 days each.
* Coordinating the provision of meals for first responders staged in Orange County.
* FDEM is in constant communication with all 67 county emergency management offices and state agencies to coordinate recovery actions and needed resources.
Power
* Power has been restored to all accounts on the mainland which can receive it.
* As of today, over 95% of accounts that can receive power on Pine Island have been restored, significantly ahead of the estimated restoration timeline.
* For a full report on current outages, clickhere.
Health and Human Services
*
Boil Water Noticeshave been issued for 80 areas in 17 counties, following the impacts from Hurricane Ian. DOH continues to monitor and maintain acomprehensive statewide list of noticesfor residents to access online.
* The Division of Disease Control and Health Protection continues to provide technical and field support to environmental health strike teams and staff by distributing environmental health information.
* Deployed staff have packed nearly 1,000 waterproof bags with essential supplies for moms and babies to be distributed to families in impacted communities.
* DOH County Health Departments have been deployed to all Disaster Recovery Centers to provide services and resources. This includes Women and Infant Care, Vital Statistics, and other public health services. Costs for any vital statistics, such as birth and death certificates, have been waived.
* DOH assisted with the relocation of a U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) mobile lab to Seminole County. EPA's lab is analyzing water samples for community water systems, and private well samples received from DOH.
* DOH's Division of Children's Medical Services' Early Steps and Newborn Screening programs has sent additional supplies to Ft. Myers. Supplies include hand sanitizer, silicone bibs, thermometers, baby spoons, and cooling towels. This will be package in Moms and Babies' waterproof bags and distributed to individuals in need.
* Hope Heroes are volunteering in shelters, helping clean yard debris and tarping roofs for seniors. To become a Hope Hero and volunteer to help older Floridians, visithelpcreatehope.com.
* Visits are being conducted at all health care facilities in counties impacted by Hurricane Ian. AHCA has completed 615 assessments at facilities in Brevard, Broward, Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Hardee, Highlands, Hillsborough, Lake, Lee, Manatee, Miami-Dade, Orange, Osceola, Palm Beach, Sarasota, Seminole, Volusia.
* 102 clients have received weather-related Emergency Home Assistance for the Elder Program funds to assist with individuals experiencing a home energy emergency in the affected areas.
* 1 special needs shelter remains open, serving 19 clients. This shelter will be phased out as clients return to their homes or identify long term housing solutions
* DOH's Children's Medical Services Plan and partners have setup 4 locations (one in DeSoto, Sarasota and Orange counties, and two locations in Lee County) for individuals to receive free hygiene andinfant supplies, in addition to other essentials. All sites are open to the public.
* DeSoto County - First Christian Church located at 34 El Verano Ave., Arcadia, Florida 34266. Hours of operation are Noon to 6 p.m.
* Lee County - Family Initiative located at 734 SW 4th St., Cape Coral, Florida 33991. Hours of operation are 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
* Lee County - Sunshine Fort Myers located at 4901 Palm Beach Blvd., Fort Myers, FL 33905. Hours of operation are 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
* Sarasota County - Sarasota Christian Church located at 2923 Ashton Road, Sarasota, FL 34231. Hours of operation are 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Infrastructure
* All accessible State-owned bridges have been inspected across Florida. FDOT continues to assist with inspections on locally owned bridges.
* 97% of cut and toss operations are complete statewide
* 100% of cut and toss operations are complete in Lee County.
* 100% of cut and toss operations are complete in Charlotte County.
* Access restored to Pine Island Bridge in just over 50 hours/ under 3 days.
* Construction has begun on the Sanibel Causeway.
* Florida Tolls reinstated at 6 a.m. on Saturday, October 15, with the exception of Alligator Alley, Pinellas Bayway, and Sunshine Skyway. Tolls at those three facilities remain suspended.
* Initial debris pick-up:
* 3,966 miles of state roads have been completed statewide.
* Statewide 58,586 cubic yards of vegetation debris have been picked up.
Bridges (state roads & interstates)
Bridges Closed as of 11 a.m. on 10/15/22
* Sanibel Causeway (Lee County)
Roadways (state roads & interstates)
Roads Closed as of 11 a.m. on 10/15/22
* Brevard County
* SR-46 Westbound at Hatbill Road - Lane closed
* Charlotte County
* Bridge closed on Rotonda Boulevard both directions at Rotonda Boulevard South
* DeSoto County
* NW 2ndBunker Avenue at Arrowhead Pond Road - Lane closed, both directions
* SR-72 Westbound beyond SR-70 - All lanes closed
* SR-72 from NW Pearce Street to SR-70 - Lane closed
* Hardee County
* N Hollandtown Road at Thoroughbred Road - Lane closed, both directions
* SR-64 from Brantwood Drive to Wilbur C King Boulevard - Lane closed, both directions
* Highlands County
* Golfview Road at Lake Drive Boulevard - Lane closed, both directions
* Marble Avenue from W Martin Road to S Lake Boulevard - Lane closed, both directions
* Lee County
* Sanibel Causeway
* Bonita Beach Road at Simmons Lane - All lanes closed
* Captiva Drive from Palmflower Lane to Sanibel Captiva Road - Lane closed, both directions
* CR-865 at Broadway Channel - Lane closed, both directions
* CR-865 from Estrellita Drive to Cape Hickory Court - Lane closed, both directions
* CR-867 Southbound from Port Comfort Road to Punta Rassa Road - All lanes closed
* Estero Boulevard at Broadway Channel - Lane closed, both directions
* Polk County
* E Grove Avenue at S Scenic Highway - Lane closed, both directions
* Seminole County
* SR-46 Eastbound at N Jungle Road - Lane closed
Freight Rail
* Seminole Gulf Railway sustained significant damage. Damage assessments continue and repair plans are underway. They are operating on their Sarasota line.
Passenger Rail
* Amtrak: operations have returned to normal service apart from Silver Star trains #91/92, which suspended rail service beyond Jacksonville. A bus bridge will be provided to Orlando, Tampa, and Miami, Florida
* SunRail: Full service will return to all stations Today- Monday, October 17.
Mass Care
* DOEA has partnered with organizations to ensure resources are delivered to older Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian.
* DCF launched the Disaster Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (D-SNAP), which is being implemented in phases by county. Phase one includes Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Hardee, Lee, Polk, and Sarasota counties. Pre-registration is required by all applicants. As of October 16, 94,525 households have pre-registered.To expedite service to eligible households, DCF is offering phone interviews through the D-SNAP Call Center. Details can be found online atMyFLFamilies.com/DSNAP.
* DCF has released more than $50 million in mass replacements of SNAP benefits to household who did not receive early release benefits. More information can be found atMyFLFamilies.com/HurricaneIan.
* DBPR investigators and other staffers from across the state are at all the Disaster Recovery Centers in Charlotte, Collier, Lee and Sarasota Counties, helping with any licensing needs and educating the public about the importance of hiring a licensed contractor.
* The Area Agency on Aging of Pasco-Pinellas County has worked with Amazon to get $13,000 in donated gift cards for seniors in affected areas.
* DCF hastwo new FamilyResource Support Centers inDeltona and New Smyrna Beach. FRSCs are staffed with Hope Navigators, crisis counselors who specialize in disaster recovery response, and public benefit eligibility specialists to help individuals and families. More information can be found atMyFLFamilies.com/FRSC.
* DCF released $235,351,849 in early SNAP benefits to a household population of approximately 773,579 people at risk of impact for Hurricane Ian. More information can be found here:ACCESS Florida - Florida Department of Children and Families (myflfamilies.com)
* Florida Housing Finance Corporation has updated its Disaster Relief webpage to provide families with information on housing resources and assistance. This webpage will continue to be updated as more information becomes available.Disaster Relief Resources and Information (floridahousing.org).
* Florida Housing has ensured that all current listings are up to date in the event that families need to quickly relocate atwww.FloridaHousingSearch.org.
* Each SHIP office has an adopted disaster strategy that allows for assistance in the immediate aftermath of a declared disaster. Strategies may include temporary relocation and rental assistance, debris removal and short-term repairs to prevent further damage to the structure or to allow for occupancy until further repairs are made. Please contact your local office directly for more information:Local Government Information (floridahousing.org)
Law Enforcement
* FHP's Quick Reaction Force (QRF) is operating on 12-hour Alpha, Bravo shifts as they continue missions in the impacted areas.
* A second wave of 120 troopers has deployed to impacted areas to relieve initial QRF teams.
* FLHSMV has deployed Florida Licensing on Wheels (FLOW) mobile units to Lee, Charlotte, Sarasota, and Collier counties to provide no-fee replacements for driver license and identification credentials, vehicle registrations, and titles.
* Dates, locations, and hours of operation for FLOW mobiles are subject to change and will be announced onFLHSMV.gov
* FLOW Locations:
* Sarasota County
* Disaster Recovery Center
* Shannon Staub Library
* 4675 Career Lane, North Port, FL 34289
* Lee County
* Disaster Recovery Center
* Lakes Regional Library
* 15290 Bass Road, Fort Myers, FL 33919
* Hertz Arena
* 11000 Everblades Parkway, Estero, FL 33928
* Disaster Recovery Center
* Joseph P. D'Alessandro Office Complex
* 2295 Victoria Ave., Ft. Myers, FL 33901
* Charlotte County
* Port Charlotte Town Center
* 1441 Tamiami Trail, Port Charlotte, FL 33948
* Collier County
* Disaster Recovery Center
* Veterans Community Park
* 1895 Veterans Park Dr, Naples, FL 34110
* ORANGE COUNTY
* Disaster Recovery Center
* Barnett Park
* 4801 W Colonial Dr., Orlando, FL 32808
* (Oct. 16-18 only)
o FLOW Hours of Operation: 9:00am - 6:00pm, seven days a week
* As of October 16, more than 4,100 customers have been served since operations began.
* FDLE is coordinating 360 missions including supporting local law enforcement agencies in the impacted areas with patrol, traffic control and security.
* FDLE has four response teams and one logistical support team deployed in Lee and Charlotte counties checking in law enforcement officers reporting for duty, maintaining the base camps and matching law enforcement resources to the identified needs.
* FDLE's mutual aid team is supporting 300 hurricane response missions.
* FDLE is preparing for a second wave of law enforcement deployments relieving those who have been deployed since last week.
* FDLE staging areas are open in Southwest Florida and Hardee County at the Lee County Sports Complex, Weigh Station Mile Marker 161 in Charlotte County and in Hardee, at the Civic Center in Wauchula. All deployed law enforcement officers in these areas should check in at one of these staging areas for work assignments.
* More than 100 FDLE agents are deployed in Southwest Florida assisting with traffic control, security needs and law enforcement check-ins.
* FDLE established telephone lines for Fort Myers regional law enforcement coordination team.
* FDLE's base camp in Lee County is fully operational serving first responders deployed to the area. Base camps include meal service, sleeping quarters, showers, laundry and restroom facilities.
* FHP continues to assist FDOT with bridge and road closures across impacted areas.
* FHP's fixed-wing aircraft and unmanned aerial systems are aiding in FDOT's efforts as they continue to undertake bridge and other infrastructure repairs.
* FHP continues to provide escorts for fuel, utility, and emergency response teams to provide critical resources to the impacted areas.
* FHP is assisting multiple local agencies with law enforcement functions in the impacted areas.
* FHP has deployed mobile command centers to the State Emergency Operations Center and southwest Florida to provide enhanced communication capabilities and additional resources.
* More than 1,700 sworn FHP members are available to assist with enhanced response efforts.
* Peer support is available 24/7 to all FHP members and their families through FHP's Peer Support Team and the FHP Wellness App to support their overall wellness.
* FHP encourages motorists to report disabled vehicles or dangerous driving conditions to *FHP (*347).
* FLHSMV driver license and motor vehicle service center closures can be foundhere.
* FLHSMV has issued Emergency Order092422, which:
* Waives specific requirements for commercial motor vehicles providing emergency relief; and
* Waives the replacement fees for driver's license and identification credentials, vehicle registrations and titles, vessel registrations and titles and temporary parking permits for impacted individuals.
* FWC has established a field base of operations in Lee County and deployed two mobile command centers and 6 BERG units to provide communications and operational support to officers in the area while they respond to calls for assistance.
* A total of approximately 67 FWC officers and support personnel are currently deployed for Hurricane Ian response and recovery efforts.
* 51 FWC officers and 1 vehicle and vessel mechanic with a full complement of four-wheel drive vehicles, vessels and response and recovery equipment and supplies are based in Lee County.
* 15 FWC officers from across the state have deployed to assess and process thousands of vessels displaced due to the storm.
* FWC officers are conducting 24-hour land-based and waterborne safety and security patrols around Sanibel Island and other barrier islands to protect people and property on the islands.
* FWC officers are using vessels to transport additional rescue personnel, supplies and equipment to all affected barrier islands inaccessible to vehicles, including Sanibel, Captiva and Pine Island.
* FWC Aviation Section is providing the State EOC with aerial assistance, reconnaissance and post-storm damage assessments.
* More than 350 captive wildlife facilities have been assessed.
* FWC, in conjunction with state and federal partners, is standing up a Unified Command to address the large numbers of displaced vessels in the aftermath of Hurricane Ian.
* If a vessel owner is removing their vessel, they should notify the Hurricane Ian Vessel Hotline of their plans for vessel removal by calling 850-488-5600 M-F, 8 a.m. - 5 p.m.
* If your vessel is missing, you have located a vessel or have questions about displaced vessels or vessels in state waters that have been rendered derelict by Hurricane Ian, you are encouraged to call the Hurricane Ian Vessel Hotline M-F, 8 a.m. - 5 p.m. at 850-488-5600.
* FWC cautions all boaters to exercise extreme caution in waterways in areas affected by Hurricane Ian and encourages boaters to report missing or damaged waterway markers by calling 866-405-2869 or by filling out an online form at:https://myfwc.com/boating/waterway/markers/damaged-ormissing/.
Private Sector Support
* Florida was approved for $30 million for the National Dislocated Worker Grant for Floridians without work due to Hurricane Ian, which DEO applied for through the U.S. Department of Labor on October 4, 2022.
*
Florida Housing Searchis a free, state resource for renters and property managers in Florida. Dynamic search options can help renters find available rental housing that fits a variety of needs and incomes. The Florida Housing Finance Corporation is verifying that all listings are up to date in the event that families need to quickly relocate.
* Uber is offering free round-trip rides, up to $30 each way, to and from 10 state-approved Disaster Recovery Centers (DRC). At these centers, those whose livelihoods have been severely affected by Hurricane Ian will be able to apply for federal assistance and disaster loans, update applications, and learn about other resources available. Details on how to redeem a free round trip, up to $30 each way, to and from a state-approved DRC are available atwww.FloridaDisaster.biz/CurrentDisasterUpdates.
* Business Recovery Centers, represented by the U.S. Small Business Administration and the Florida Small Business Development Center network. Visitwww.FloridaSBDC.org/disaster/loan-assistance/to find a location near you.
* Work search reporting and other requirements for Reemployment Assistance claims have been temporarily waived for Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian in FEMA disaster-declared counties.Eligible Floridians must file for regular state Reemployment Assistance benefits before applying for Disaster Unemployment Assistance (DUA). DUA is available for individuals and businesses in FEMA disaster-declared counties. Learn morehere.
* Over 13,400 DUA claims have been submitted since DUA was activated and more than 6,400 have been approved.
* To support Floridians during this time, DEO has deployed personnel to the field and extended call center hours to seven days per week. Additionally, DEO secured sixID.mekiosks and support technicians to reduce the number of fraudulent claims. DEO is expanding the number of agents available to review and process claims.
* All these efforts are focused on reducing the processing time so DUA benefits can be expedited to Floridians in need.
* DEO and CareerSource Florida are mobilizing resources from other Local Workforce Development Boards and activating thedisaster recovery jobs portal to connect businesses and people impacted by Hurricane Ian with workforce programs. To look for employment opportunities or post disaster-related jobs to help rebuild Florida's communities impacted by Hurricane Ian, visit Florida's Disaster Recovery Jobs Portalatdisasterrecovery.employflorida.com.
* CareerSource Florida is working with DEO to support recovery efforts and help connect affected residents with temporary employment and other recovery assistance. All career centers are open statewide. To find your local career center, visitFind Your Local Teamor Career Center Directory.
* CareerSource Southwest Florida centers in Fort Myers, Immokalee, Clewiston, Naples, Port Charlotte are open and operational Monday - Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Information on disaster recovery resources and mobile career center locations are available atwww.careersourcesouthwestflorida.com/disaster-recovery-information/.
* CareerSource South Florida and CareerSource Pasco Hernando locations have deployed mobile units to the Fort Myers Disaster Recovery Center.
* CareerSource Southwest Florida has deployed volunteers to the Disaster Recovery Center to assist impacted individuals.
* The Florida Small Business Emergency Bridge Loan Program has been activated to assist small businesses that have been impacted by Hurricane Ian with short-term, zero-interest loans to meet the businesses' immediate financial needs and "bridge the gap" until longer term funding sources become available. Small businesses in the most impacted counties will be escalated and prioritized as they are received. Visitwww.FloridaJobs.org/EBLto learn more.
* DEO is updatingwww.FloridaDisaster.bizwith real-time information for business owners, their families, and employees for Hurricane Ian.
* DEO's Rebuild Florida team continues to work with homeowners to assess any damage that may have occurred to Hurricane Irma projects from Hurricane Ian. The team continues to rotate deployed staff to Ian-impacted areas, supporting recovery efforts.
* DEO's Secretary Dane Eagle distributed a memo on Tuesday, September 27, 2022, releasing $1.4 million in Low-Income Home Energy Assistant Program (LIHEAP) set-aside emergency funding for use by LIHEAP providers across the state to support preparedness activities such as transportation and temporary housing to preserve health and safety.
* VISIT FLORIDA has activated itsEmergency Accommodations Moduleon Expedia to provide real-time hotel availability and lodging resources for impacted Floridians and visitors.
* Enterprise Florida activated itsDisaster Assistance pagewith a list of state and federal resources available for businesses to utilize in their mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery activities.
* Enterprise Florida hosted its second Hurricane Ian Response Meeting with economic development partners, as well as representatives from utilities, about various needs they are facing, county recovery plans, and resources available to help those in need.
* DEO has deployed team members and five mobile units, with more on the way, to Hurricane Ian-impacted areas this week to support recovery efforts.
* AT&T is waiving talk, text, and data overage charges for AT&T Postpaid & PREPAID customers with billing addresses in 828 zip codes across Florida from September 28, 2022, through October 28, 2022, to keep customers connected before, during and after any major storm event. AT&T is welcoming other carriers' customers to roam on its networks so they can connect, even if their carrier's service isn't available after the storm. Since opening the AT&T network last week for roaming, we've handled about 47 TBs of traffic from other carriers to help keep those in impacted areas connected. 47 TBs of data is equal to more than 16 billion text messages. Store locations and hours are available atwww.att.com/stores.
* AT&T and the AT&T Foundation are donating $400,000 to organizations supporting restoration work in the wake of Hurricane Ian; $200,000 to the Florida Disaster Fund (www.volunteerflorida.org), $100,000 to the Information Technology Disaster Resource Center (www.itdrc.org) and $100,000 to SBPUSA (www.sbpusa.org).
* Comcast has Xfinity WiFi vans provide free internet connectivity as communities continue to recover from Hurricane Ian. Each Xfinity WiFi van can provide wireless internet connectivity to more than 1,000 users at one time over a 300-square-foot area. The vans will be available from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily at the following locations until further notice:
* Cape Coral: Walmart Supercenter, 1619 Del Prado Boulevard South, Cape Coral, FL
* Bonita Springs: Bonita Springs Public Library, 2687 Pine Ave., Bonita Springs, FL
* Fort Myers: Walmart Supercenter, 17105 San Carlos Blvd., Fort Myers, FL
* Port Charlotte: Walmart Neighborhood Market (Charlotte Square) at 2150 Tamiami Trail, Port Charlotte, FL
* As residents of Southwest Florida continue to recover, Verizon is extending its support for counties most impacted by Hurricane Ian. Consumer and small business customers in the following counties will continue to receive unlimited calling, texting, and mobile data through October 31, 2022, in Charlotte, Collier, Desoto, Hardee, Lee, and Sarasota counties.Verizon has deployed three Wireless Emergency Connection Centers (WECCs) to assist Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian with wi-fi, phone batteries, and charging stations. These stations are available to any customer of any carrier stay connected. WECCs are available at the following locations:
* Port Charlotte Town Center Mall, 1441 Tamiami Trail, Port Charlotte, FL (open 10:00 a.m. - 6:00 p.m.)
* Fort Myers Town Hall, 2525 Estero Boulevard, Fort Myers Beach, FL (open 8:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m.)
* Lakes Regional Library 15290 Bass Road, Fort Myers, FL (open 9:00 a.m. - 6:00 p.m.)
* Fishers of Men Lutheran Church, 10360 Stringfellow Rd, St James City, FL (open 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily)
* Additionally, charging pedestals are available at the following locations:
* Estero Community Center, 9200 Corkscrew Palms Boulevard, Estero, FL 33928
* Hertz Arena, 11000 Everblades Parkway, Estero, FL 33928
* North Collier Regional Park, 15000 Livingston Road, Naples, FL 34116
* 2817 Southwest 3rd Lane, Cape Coral, FL 33991
* 1029 Diplomat Parkway East, Cape Coral, FL 33909
* 1410 Sports Blvd, Cape Coral, FL 33991
* 1039 Burnt Store Road, Cape Coral, FL 33993
* Airbnb has launched a special website to help Hurricane Ian Relocation efforts for impacted residents atAirbnb.com/hurricaneianflorida. The page features open (vacant and available for rent) properties that are availableto be booked outside of the FEMA Disaster zones. As communities become fully restored with water and electricity, Airbnb will add more open properties.
* For displaced residents of Lee and Charlotte counties,Airbnbis also working with their nonprofit partners to offer vouchers for temporary housing at Airbnb properties. To learn more about how the voucher program works, see Airbnb's full press release at https://news.airbnb.com/airbnb-org-hurricane-relief-efforts/.
* DEO staff and volunteers are providing in-person services and surging resources to five Disaster Recover Center locations located in Lee, Charlotte, Sarasota, and Collier Counties. Locations for DRCs are available onwww.FloridaDisaster.org.
* Business Recovery Centers, represented by the U.S. Small Business Administration and the Florida Small Business Development Center network, are stationed at the following locations:
* Chloe Coney Urban Enterprise Center, 1907 E Hillsborough Avenue, Tampa, FL (open Monday - Friday from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.; open Saturday from 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.)
* The HUB at SWFL INC, 25071 Chamber of Commerce Drive, Bonita Springs, FL (open Monday - Sunday from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.)
* The Naples Players, 701 5th Avenue South, Naples FL (open Monday from 9:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. and Tuesday - Sunday from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.)
* Sanford Information Center, 30 E 1st Street, Sanford, FL (open Monday - Sunday from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.)
* The Kiwanis Club, 360 Santa Barbara Boulevard South, Cape Coral, FL (opens at 10:00 a.m. on Monday, October 10, 2022)
Florida Department of Education (DOE)
* All school districts impacted by Hurricane Ian will be open by Tuesday, October 18, less than three weeks after Hurricane Ian made landfall. More info can be foundhere.
Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
* DEP is coordinating with FWC and USCG on derelict/displaced vessels.
* DEP has activated a Waste Hotline for local governments and established a dedicated email account for county debris/waste assistance.
* DEP landfill strike team members along with EPA On-Scene Coordinator staff continue DDMS/Debris inspections.
* 294 Disaster Debris Management Sites have been authorized to operate for Hurricane Ian, including 67 in Lee, Charlotte and Sarasota counties. These sites are a critical component of expediting clean-up, reducing environmental and public health impacts, and meeting federal reimbursement requirements.
* DEP staff are on the ground assessing water and wastewater infrastructure on some of the hardest hit areas Fort Myers Beach, Pine Island, Sanibel Island and Gasparilla Island, with resources from FlaWARN, US Army Corps of Engineers, local utilities and the Division of Emergency Management's contractor.
* Beaches staff continue to conduct beach surveys to assess erosion and vulnerability in impacted areas.
* DEP is coordinating with FlaWARN and other response agencies on the dispatch of generators, fuel and pump trucks to assist drinking water and wastewater facilities to help get them operational as soon as possible.
* Hazardous Area Response Teams have been deployed to aid with assessment and resources for addressing impacts to hazardous waste facilities in impacted areas.
* Following the issuance of the Governor's Executive Order, DEP issued anEmergency Final Orderwaiving permitting requirements for the storage and processing of solid waste, including storm debris.
* DEP has also issued anEmergency Final Orderto expedite necessary repair, replacement and restoration of structures, equipment, surface water management systems, works and other systems damaged by the storm.
* Nine Florida State Parks strike teams have been assembled to assist with assessment and recovery efforts at impacted parks. Five teams are on the ground today in impacted areas. Other teams will be deployed as conditions allow and needs are identified.
Resource Management
* Reviewed the debris removal requirements for the Fort Myers service center vacant lot.
* Forwarded electric transformer manufacturers to ESF 12 (Energy) for the availability of restoration equipment.
* Continued to follow up for revised quote and terms for equipment rentals.
* Maintained contact with vendors for requested quotes to conclude requests for commodities.
* Charlotte County sheltering requirements have been sent to the Division of Real Estate Development and Management for sourcing.
Licensing
* DBPR Secretary Melanie S. Griffin is accompanying our Division of Regulation team in Charlotte County as they sweep neighborhoods assessing whether there is damage and looking for unlicensed contracting.
* DOH's Board of Clinical Social Work, Marriage and Family Therapy, and Mental Health Counseling is increasing resources to expedite processing of licensure applications, ensuring greater availability of qualified mental health professionals.
*
DBPR Emergency Order 2022-04waives the application fees associated with relocating or reopening certain businesses, including the addition of branch locations regulated by the Department or by any board, commission or division of the Department, where relocation or reopening arises from damages caused by Hurricane Ian in the listed counties.
*
DBPR Emergency Order 2022-03waives the requirement for certified or registered, general, building, or residential contractors to subcontract roofing work for the repair or installation of any roof type in listed counties.
* The emergency order clarifies that the installation of non-permanent, emergency tarps to relieve damage caused by Hurricane Ian fall within the exemptions listed in section 489.103(6).
*
Temporary Veterinarian License Application:The Florida Board of Veterinary Medicine has a30-Day Temporary Veterinarian Licenseavailable to out-of-state veterinarians who do not currently hold a Florida Veterinary License but wish to come to Florida to provide relief veterinary services.
* Florida licensed veterinarians interested in offering volunteer services should contact the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services,Florida Vet Corpfor information at 1-800-HELP-FLA (1-800-435-7352).
*
Food Industry Bulletins:DBPR has publishedEmergency Recovery GuidelinesandBoil Water Notice Guidelineson our website, and DBPR's Division of Hotels and Restaurants is distributing the notices to licensed businesses in impacted areas.
* DBPREmergency Order 2022-01extends the renewal deadline from September 30 or October 1, 2022, to October 31, 2022, for the multiple licenses.
* Licenses renewed on or before October 31, 2022 shall be considered as timely renewals and will not be assessed any late fees.
* DBPR Emergency Order 2022-01 also extends the deadline for the filing of monthly reports and returns by certain alcoholic beverage and tobacco license holders from October 10, 2022, to October 31, 2022. Additionally, the order suspends and tolls through October 31, 2022, all final orders reflecting final agency action and all time requirements and deadlines for filing responses outlined in agency orders.
* DBPR Board Meeting cancellations and other updates can be found athttp://myfloridalicense.com/emergency.
* DBPR's Division of Drugs, Devices and Cosmetics is coordinating with wholesale distributors of prescription drugs and medical gases to provide information and support relating to exceptions for the emergency distribution of these critical supplies where needed.
Insurance
* OIR is requiring insurers to report preliminary catastrophe claims for Hurricane Ian. To date, insurers have reported a total of$ 5,875,767,426 in estimated insured losses and a total of533,837claims. This aggregate information is compiled from claims data filed by insurers, it has not been audited or independently verified. Additional claim data and information can be found on OIR's Hurricane Ian information pagehere.
* The Department of Revenue announced extended due dates for corporate income tax filers impacted by Hurricane Ian following the recent declaration from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). Eligible taxpayers that file Florida corporate income tax returns, as well as Florida corporate income tax installment payments, with original due dates or extended due dates falling on or after September 23, 2022 and before March 2, 2023 will now have a due date of March 2, 2023. This tax relief is applicable to affected businesses anywhere in Florida. Taxpayers needing assistance with corporate income tax filing may contact DOR's Taxpayer Assistance at (850) 488-6800 orGTAHurricaneHelp@floridarevenue.com
* OIR issuedEmergency Order 300997-22-EOin response to Hurricane Ian regarding the extension of grace periods, limitations on cancellations and nonrenewals, deemers and limitations on "use and file" filings. This Emergency Order is issued to protect the public health, safety and welfare of all Florida policyholders.
* OIR instituted a data call for the purpose of collecting catastrophe claims data related to Hurricane Ian. OIR is requiring daily catastrophe claims reporting for Hurricane Ian starting Friday, September 30 to assist with determining the impact of Hurricane Ian on Florida's insurance industry. More information regarding catastrophe claims data and reporting is availablehere.
Florida Main Street Program
* The Florida Department of State, Division of Historical Resources', Florida Main Street Program has been in contact with Florida Main Street communities before and after Hurricane Ian to mitigate damage to the communities and historic properties in these communities.
* Florida Main Street has dispersed information to communities including recovery resources, volunteer assistance, Small Business Association Loan opening and disaster assistance information in disaster declaration areas.
* Additionally, The Florida Main Street Program has paired up communities that were affected by Hurricane Ian with mentors who were successful in rehabilitation after Hurricane Michael to provide pragmatic experience about ways to move forward and recover after disaster.
Elections Update
* At the request of the Supervisors of Elections in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties, and at the recommendation of Secretary of State Cord Byrd, the Governor signed Executive Order 22-234, which will help ensure adequate access to Florida's 2022 General Election ballot for the voters of Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties.
* The Governor's Executive Order includes provisions authorizing the Supervisors of Elections in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties to:
* Extend the number of days for early voting and designate additional early voting locations. The early voting period may begin as early as Monday, October 24, 2022, and can extend through Election Day, November 8, 2022.
* Allow voters in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties to request by phone that their vote-by-mail (VBM) ballot be mailed to an address other than their address of record. Voters must still provide an appropriate form of identification in the same manner as absent uniform service and overseas voters.
* Designate and provide notice of the locations for secure ballot intake stations and relocate and consolidate polling locations as necessary.
* Increase the pool of eligible poll workers who may serve within Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties by making eligible any poll workers previously trained for the 2020 election cycle and thereafter and by encouraging state employees to serve as poll workers in these counties.
* Governor DeSantis also directed all state agencies to render aid and assistance as needed by the Supervisors of Elections in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties. Secretary Byrd and the Department of State assessed the need for these provisions based on extensive outreach to Florida's Supervisors of Elections:
* Secretary Byrd and the Division of Elections leadership conducted continuous outreach and assessed the needs and readiness of counties in or around Hurricane Ian's path, including: Charlotte, Citrus, Collier, DeSoto, Dixie, Flagler, Gilchrist, Hardee, Hernando, Highlands, Hillsborough, Lafayette, Lake, Lee, Levy, Manatee, Orange, Osceola, Pasco, Pinellas, Polk, Putnam, Sarasota, Seminole, St. Johns, Taylor, and Volusia counties. Secretary Byrd also personally visited the hardest hit areas, including Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Lee, Hardee, and Sarasota counties to meet with their Supervisors of Elections in-person.
* Furthermore, Secretary Byrd participated in discussions with the Florida Supervisors of Elections (FSE). The FSE is a nonprofit association representing the Supervisors of Elections from all of Florida's 67 counties.
* Lastly, since Hurricane Ian made landfall, numerous Supervisors of Elections have publicly addressed their readiness, and thankfully most have very publicly stated that Ian's impacts will not interfere with their duties. This is a testament to the resiliency of Florida's elections system.
Office Closures
* DOH in Lee County is the only county still experiencing closures due to Hurricane Ian. An alternate location for services is being identified so in-person services can resume as quickly as possible. Some services are available at the Michigan Clinic, and remainder of clients are being served remotely or through other locations.
* State facilities closed can be found atdms.myflorida.com/buildingclosuresand the Florida DMS Emergency Information Hotline at 888-336-7345. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
Load-Date: October 19, 2022



End of Document


Indigenous Youth Challenged to Solve Their Community's Water Issues; Ikusik High School Students from Salluit, an Inuit northern village in the Nunavik Region of Québec to present proposed innovations to over 100 First Nations Water Operators in an event in Vancouver on October 18
Business Wire
October 17, 2022 Monday 3:30 PM GMT

Copyright 2022 Business Wire, Inc.
Length: 583 words
Dateline: VANCOUVER, British Columbia 
Body




WHAT: Seven students from a Nunavik high school will present their innovative ideas to improve drinking water health in their community as part of the national Indigenous Youth (K-12) Potable Water Innovation Challenge.
This press release features multimedia. View the full release here: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20221017005300/en/
WHERE: The students will present their ideas to university researchers, industry leaders, entrepreneurs and First Nation Water Operators, in an event held at University of British Columbia, Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Room 202,
2360 East Mall] in Vancouver BC, V6T 1Z3
WHEN: Tuesday, October 18, between 11:00 - 15:00
INTERVIEW OPPORTUNITIES: The following people will be available on site/virtual prior to and after the session:
•	Eugene Henri KOULLA (High school teacher)
•	Professor Stephanie Guilherme, University of Ottawa, Mentor
•	Professor Madjid Mohseni, Scientific Director, RESEAU Centre for Mobilizing Innovation
•	Student Team
PHOTO/VIDEO OPPORTUNITIES: will be available on site. The student's presentation to the panel is not open to photography or filming.
RSVP/ONSITE CONTACT: Madjid Mohseni, connect@reseaucmi.org
About the Indigenous Youth (K-12) Potable Water Innovation Challenge: The National Challenge is an open competition among youth designed to ignite a passion for science and innovation, community health, water-health and community service in young people, and business creation. This pilot initiative is predicated on principles of self-determination and self-government, developed and coordinated by RESEAU Centre for Mobilizing Innovation, the Challenge allows youth teams to engage elders and community leadership to identify local water challenges (e.g., watershed-specific issues in terms of natural and man-made stresses such as industrial or agricultural use and climate change), barriers to solving them and potential solutions. With mentorship from university researchers and water industry experts, the teams will develop a solution to solve a single challenge. Then, they workshop their idea with entrepreneurs before presenting their ideas to their community. Their work will be judged by their community and an Indigenous Advisory Council, who are also overseeing the program development, for opportunities for accelerator support to develop creative ideas into actual products and services to serve their community (and Indigenous communities at large).
About RESEAU Centre for Mobilizing Innovation: RESEAU is a nonprofit centre of excellence dedicated to the design and implementation of innovative solutions for drinking water quality and community health in Indigenous and rural communities. Through rigorous proprietary (multi-award-winning) problem-solving methodology, The Community Circle(TM), we ally with rural and Indigenous communities to develop innovative solutions for their water-health challenges and define success on their unique terms. In addition, we ensure all actionable insights are independent, objective, and tailored to the communities' goals and priorities, building grassroots trust and confidence in driving the product development cycle from concept to execution and beyond. Together, we have solved several long-standing boil water advisories in rural settings, redefining sustainability, the economics of drinking water, and community health along the way. www.reseaucmi.org
View source version on businesswire.com: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20221017005300/en/

CONTACT: Madjid Mohseni, connect@reseaucmi.org
http://www.businesswire.com
Load-Date: October 17, 2022



End of Document


Congress investigates Mississippi's infrastructure spending after Jackson water crisis
UPI
October 18, 2022 Tuesday GENERAL_EDIT_CORRECTION ERROR Document ID 0 Has error Validate old format failed - Input Date Invalid - 0055: Unparseable date: "0055"EST

Copyright 2022 U.P.I. All Rights Reserved

Length: 504 words
Byline: SHERI WALSH
Dateline: Oct. 18 
Body





House Democrats have launched an investigation into how Mississippi state leaders spent millions of dollars in federal funds allocated for infrastructure after last month's water crisis in Jackson.
Reps. Carolyn Maloney, D-N.Y., and Bennie Thompson, D-Miss., sent a letter to Mississippi Gov. Tate Reeves on Monday questioning how more than $10 billion in federal funding, specifically $429 million to enhance the state's water infrastructure, was allocated after the predominately Black capital city of Jackson suffered a water infrastructure collapse this summer that left thousands without running water.
"On Aug. 29, 2022, torrential rain in the Jackson area caused floodwater to seep into the O.B. Curtis Water Treatment Plant, leading to the failure of the backup pumps upon which the plant relied," the letter, detailing the investigation by the Homeland Security and the Oversight and Reform committees, said. "The resulting system-wide loss of water pressure left Jackson residents without reliable access to safe drinking water for more than two weeks."
Mississippi lifted its boil notice in Jackson and surrounding areas after seven weeks on Sept. 15.
"It is possible, although I certainly pray not inevitable, that there will be further interruptions," Reeves said last month. "We cannot perfectly predict what may go wrong with such a broken system in the future."
Both Reeves and President Joe Biden declared a state of emergency to deliver bottled water to approximately 180,000 residents during last month's crisis after which Jackson's Mayor Chokwe Lumumba argued the city was in no position to handle the heavy rains and threats from climate change because state leaders had failed to provide financial support to fix the aging plant.
In Monday's letter, Maloney and Thompson also questioned why Jackson's water infrastructure failed while "a neighboring suburb's water service continued to flow."
"The city, the majority of whose residents are Black, has also suffered decades of disinvestment, and residents report they have not gone more than a month for over two years without a 'boil water' notice in effect," the letter said, adding that many of the pipes under Jackson have not been properly maintained since the 1950s. "Due to a steady exodus of white and affluent residents, the city has a reduced tax base to repair aging infrastructure."
On Friday, Reeves called for increased staffing at the treatment plant to ensure "clean water continues to be delivered to the people of Jackson." The Mississippi Emergency Management Agency has requested the extension of an emergency procurement contract, scheduled to end on Nov. 29, for more staffing and maintenance at the treatment facility.
"MEMA is acting as the coordinating agency for the procurement of this contract. Staffing has been a critical issue at these facilities, and we are ready to move to the next phase of stabilizing Jackson's water services," Stephen McCraney, MEMA executive director, said in a statement. "Our top priority is life safety."
Load-Date: October 18, 2022



End of Document


Reps. Maloney, Thompson Launch Formal Investigation into Miss. Governor Distribution of Federal Funds for Water System Repairs in Jackson
Targeted News Service
October 18, 2022 Tuesday 8:30 AM  EST

Copyright 2022 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 568 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




Rep. Carolyn Maloney, D-New York, chair of the House Oversight and Reform Committee, issued the following news release:
Rep. Carolyn B. Maloney, Chairwoman of the Committee on Oversight and Reform, and Rep. Bennie G. Thompson, Chairman of the Committee on Homeland Security, sent a letter to Mississippi Governor Tate Reeves requesting information on how the state plans to distribute more than $10 billion in federal funding from the American Rescue Plan Act and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, including $429 million that was specifically allotted to enhance the state's water infrastructure.
"We urge you to take action to protect the health and safety of Jackson residents and direct funding to Jackson immediately to fix this life and death issue," wrote the Chairs.
"This funding must be sustained to ensure that a safe and dependable drinking water system endures, especially in the face of climate change that will put even more stress on the city's water infrastructure."
On August 30, 2022, President Biden declared the Jackson water crisis a federal emergency after torrential rain in the Jackson area left residents without reliable access to safe drinking water for more than two weeks.
Scientists have concluded that the rise in coastal sea-levels and frequent flooding in Mississippi--which contributed to the water crisis in Jackson--are a direct result of climate change. The city, the majority of whose residents are Black, has also suffered decades of disinvestment, and residents report they have not gone more than a month without a "boil water" notice in effect for over two years.
The American Rescue Plan and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law made billions of dollars available to Mississippi to address a variety of problems, however, criteria used by the state to allocate federal funding may limit the funds Jackson receives compared to other locales, despite Jackson's much greater need. The Mississippi legislature's decision to allocate federal funding from the State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds program on a matching basis with municipalities risks further perpetuating underinvestment in Jackson. The cost of necessary maintenance to Jackson's water distribution systems is projected to be as high as $1 billion. Under the matching formula Mississippi adopted for American Rescue Plan funds, Jackson would directly receive, at most, around $84 million for water projects.
Jackson city officials informed Committee staff that the state has repeatedly sought to limit funding for Jackson to address its unsafe water systems, including the state's initial plan to bar communities of more than 4,000 people from competing for additional funding from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
In light of this information, the Chairs requested that the Governor provide the Committees with information related to the State of Mississippi's efforts to address the water crisis in Jackson and improve drinking water infrastructure, including the distribution of federal funds to localities, by October 31, 2022.
Click here (https://oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/2022-10-17.CBM%20BGT%20to%20Reeves-MS%20re%20Jackson%20Water%20Crisis.pdf) to read today's letter.
* * *
Original text here: https://oversight.house.gov/news/press-releases/chairs-maloney-and-thompson-launch-formal-investigation-into-mississippi
Copyright Targeted News Services
null-7974736 T40-MgEditor
Load-Date: October 18, 2022



End of Document


Winning lottery ticket, stray cat feeding trial, booby-trapped political signs: News from around our 50 states
USA Today Online
October 18, 2022

Copyright 2022 Gannett Media Corp  All Rights Reserved
Section: CONSTRUCTION NEWS & US NEWS
Length: 9597 words
Byline: From USA TODAY Network and wire reports
Body




Alabama
Wetumpka: The trials for two women facing misdemeanor charges for feeding stray cats in the city have been delayed. The trials for Beverly Roberts, 85, and Mary Alston, 60, were set in Wetumpka Municipal Court for Thursday. The trials have been continued and a new date has not been set, said Terry Luck, one of the women’s defense attorneys. Luck and the women’s other attorney, retired Montgomery County Circuit Judge William Shashy, have scheduling conflicts, he said. The defense also asked city prosecutor Kenny James to recuse himself; he has a potential conflict of interest since he represented Roberts in a divorce case, Luck said. 
James has recused himself. Roberts faces charges of criminal trespassing and disorderly conduct, and Alston faces charges of criminal trespassing and interfering with governmental operations, records show. In June both women were arrested on public property in downtown Wetumpka while they were attempting to feed and trap stray cats. Once the cats are trapped, the women pay to have them neutered and either work to get them adopted to return them to the stray colony. Officers arrived and arrested them, saying they had been previously trespassed and were told not to feed animals. Wetumpka Police Chief Greg Benton says the feeding of the animals created a nuisance because it attracts more cats to the area. Benton said both women were “repeatedly” warned not to feed the cats and could have prevented the arrests by heeding those warnings. Luck says the arrests are baseless and that the women were performing a service by working to neuter the animals and prevent the stay cat population from growing.
Alaska
Juneau: U.S. Rep. Mary Peltola reported raising $2.3 million in just over three weeks in September, leaving the Democrat with a large cash advantage over Republican rivals Sarah Palin and Nick Begich heading into the Nov. 8 election. Meanwhile, Republican U.S. Sen. Lisa Murkowski and Kelly Tshibaka, a Republican challenger backed by former President Donald Trump, each raised just over $1 million from late July to Sept. 30, though Murkowski had about three times more cash available at the end of the period. The filings Saturday with the Federal Election Commission for the House race cover Sept. 6 through Sept. 30. Filings in the Senate race covered July 28 through Sept. 30. Peltola on Aug. 31 won a special election to fill Alaska’s House seat until January in a race that also included Palin and Begich. Next month’s election will decide who holds the seat for a two-year term, starting in January. Peltola, in the latest filings, reported having nearly $2.3 million available at the end of September. Palin, a former Alaska governor and the 2008 Republican vice presidential nominee, reported bringing in about $230,000 during the latest period and having about $195,000 available. Begich reported raising about $57,500 and having just over $545,000 available. Begich loaned his campaign $650,000 earlier in the cycle.
Arizona
Sun City West: A father’s quick reaction kept a 12-year-old girl breathing after she was struck by lightning. Her father performed CPR three times after she was struck during Saturday’s storms in Sun City West. The girl, Ella, had stepped outside of her grandparent’s house to play with a friend when her father Steven Jorgensen heard loud thunder, saw a bright flash and saw her collapse. Jorgensen said he saw his daughter fall and immediately started performing CPR, which he learned while serving in the Marine Corps. “I got her heart back going, I got her breathing, and it was only for a short amount of time until I lost her again,” Jorgensen said. Jorgensen restarted CPR, got her heart to beat again and brought her inside the home while his parents were calling 911. While he was talking to the dispatcher, Ella’s heart stopped again. As Jorgensen started performing CPR for a third time, he said he was trying to remain calm and remembered a scene from the TV show “The Office” where they learn how to perform CPR. “You could hear me singing the Bee Gee’s ‘Staying Alive’ as I was giving her a resuscitation and then finally I got her going,” Jorgensen said. About three minutes later, emergency responders showed up and took over. Ella was taken to Banner Thunderbird Medical Center, and then she was flown to Valleywise Health Medical Center where she has been recovering “very well,” said Dr. Kevin Foster, Director of the Arizona Burn Center at Valleywise Health.
Arkansas
Van Buren: A man who had been booked into the Crawford County Jail on Friday died in custody Saturday, an attorney representing his family said. Jacob Allen Jones, 26, was booked at the jail by Van Buren police on a complaint of failure to appear on prior drug charges at 4:12 p.m. Friday, jail records show. Attorney David Powell of Fort Smith said Jones died Saturday. He said Jones overdosed at the jail. He said Jones was in a cell for several hours without medical care. “I’m trying to get all of the information I can,” Powell said Sunday night. Efforts to reach Crawford County Sheriff Jimmy Damante Sunday were unsuccessful. Jones’ body was taken to the state medical examiner’s office in Little Rock where the cause and the manner of death will be determined, the Crawford County Coroner’s office reported Monday. Powell said Jones suffered a medical episode at the jail. Other inmates stated they called for help from detention officers. Four detention officers have been placed on administrative leave pending the investigation, Powell said.
California
Sacramento: California’s coronavirus emergency will officially end in February, Gov. Gavin Newsom announced Monday, nearly three years after the state’s first confirmed death from the disease prompted a raft of restrictions that upended public life. The decision will have little practical impact on most people’s lives, as most of the nearly 600 pandemic-related orders Newsom has issued since the start of the pandemic have already been lifted. And it won’t affect public health orders – including a pending statewide vaccine mandate for schoolchildren that could take effect next summer. But it does signal a symbolic end for some of the most restrictive elements of the pandemic, as it will dissolve Newsom’s authority to alter or change laws to make it easier for the government to quickly respond to the public health crisis. “The State of Emergency was an effective and necessary tool that we utilized to protect our state, and we wouldn’t have gotten to this point without it,” Newsom said in a news release, adding that the declaration will formally end on Feb. 28. Newsom declared a state of emergency for the coronavirus on March 4, 2020, shortly after an elderly patient was the first confirmed death from the disease in California. At the time, there were just 53 cases of COVID-19 in California, and state officials were holding a cruise ship off the coast so it could test passengers before allowing them to disembark in the state.
Colorado
Pueblo County: Nearly 110,000 voters in a southern Colorado county will be receiving general election ballots that were mistakenly labeled as primary election ballots, a blunder that has led the state’s secretary of state to appoint a supervisor to oversee November’s vote in a county that also had issues with ballots in its primary election. The misprint on ballots that are being sent out to voters in Pueblo County was on a tear-off tab and does not effect the “legal validity” or accuracy of the rest of the ballot, Secretary of State Jena Griswold’s office said in a news release Monday. For that reason and because of the short time frame before the ballots were mailed, they will not be reprinted. It is the second time this year that the county has had problems with ballots.
Connecticut
Waterbury: A commuter train struck a tractor trailer in Connecticut on Monday, authorities said. Metropolitan Transportation Authority officials said a Metro-North train headed to Bridgeport hit a tractor trailer at a railroad crossing in Waterbury shortly before 11 a.m. The MTA did not provide any information about injuries, but Lt. Ryan Bessette of the Waturbury police said the tractor driver and at least two train passengers were treated for injuries that appeared to be minor. Train service in the area was halted while police and the MTA investigated the crash.
Delaware
Dover: A 29-year-old man who was fatally shot early Sunday in Dover has been identified by police. Jesse Holley marks the city’s first homicide this year. Police were dispatched to the 100 block of S. Bradford St. just after 1:10 a.m. Sunday after receiving a call for a shooting. Arriving officers found Holley there. Dover Police Master Cpl. Ryan Schmid said Holley had a gunshot wound to his lower body. Holley was taken to an area hospital, where he died. This is Dover’s first homicide since June 30, 2021, when 19-year-old Tysean Nelson was one of four people shot in the capital city’s 100 block of S. New St. So far this year, 14 people have been shot in Dover – one fatally. Last year at the same time, 36 people had been shot in Dover – three of them fatally. Holley’s fatal shooting investigation is ongoing and anyone with information should contact the Dover police.
District of Columbia
Washington: Authorities said a maintenance worker brought a registered gun into a high school, WUSA-TV reports. The worker showed up to Anacostia High School with the gun in his bag after the school requested a worker for repairs, and the man was arrested. Police didn’t say if the gun was loaded, according to the news outlet. Having a firearm on school property is not allowed at any D.C. Public Schools campus. No injuries were reported. “Please be assured that no one was harmed, and the incident was promptly handled according to our security procedures,” DCPS Press Secretary Deborah Isaac said. “All students and staff remained safe and supervised during this incident.”
Florida
Fort Myers: A winning lottery ticket worth a share of a $494 million Mega Millions jackpot was purchased in a city hammered by Hurricane Ian late last month. State lottery officials on Monday said one of the two winning tickets was purchased at a 7-Eleven in Fort Myers. The other winning ticket was bought in California. Hurricane Ian made landfall in southwest Florida as a Category 4 storm on Sept. 28 and has been blamed for more than 100 fatalities in the state. It was the third-deadliest storm to hit the U.S. mainland this century. More than half of the storm-related deaths in Florida were reported in Lee County, which includes Fort Myers. Lottery winners in the state have 180 days to claim their prize. Under a new state law, lottery winners can remain anonymous for 90 days from the day they claim the winnings, if their prize is worth $250,000 or more. Past winners have also set up legal trusts as a way to keep their identities anonymous.
Georgia
Town: A college student died after being struck by the propeller of a small plane as he disembarked at an airport in southeast Georgia, authorities said. The Federal Aviation Administration and the National Transportation Board are investigating the death Sunday night at Statesboro-Bulloch County Airport, FAA spokesman Steve Kulm said. Sani Aliyu, of Atlanta, and a young woman had flown on the single-engine Cessna to nearby Savannah and back on a date, Bulloch County Coroner Jake Futch told the Statesboro Herald. He said the plane landed safely on the return trip to Statesboro. The woman “got off the plane and walked toward the back of the plane,” Futch said, “and he got off the airplane and walked toward the front of the plane, and when he did, the propeller hit him.” Aliyu was a sophomore enrolled at Georgia Southern University, school spokeswoman Melanie Simon said. A pilot and co-pilot had flown the couple, said Capt. Todd Hutchens of the Bulloch County Sheriff’s Office. He said deputies were sharing information they gathered with the FAA and NTSB. “Nobody is really at fault or anything,” Hutchens said. “It was an accident.”
Hawaii
Honolulu: A former building plans examiner pleaded guilty Monday to all charges in an indictment accusing him of participating in a scheme to take bribes in exchange for expediting projects. Wayne Inouye pleaded guilty to six counts of honest services wire fraud and one count of making a false statement. He did not have an agreement with U.S. prosecutors about what sentence they will seek. Prosecutors say Inouye took at least $89,000 in bribes from an architect and several thousand dollars from others to approve and expedite their projects ahead of others. Inouye lied to an FBI agent and federal prosecutor when he told them an architect loaned him $100,000, Assistant U.S. Attorney Craig Nolan said. When asked by the judge at Monday’s hearing to describe what he did, Inouye didn’t use the words bribe or bribery. He said an architect offered to compensate him to review plans before submitting them so that he could ensure they were code-compliant. “These plans would have been approved anyway,” he said, but added that they were expedited. He also said he received compensation from a signage contractor to help them submit their application to the department. He said he made a misleading statement to an FBI agent and a federal prosecutor when he told them the compensation was a loan. Honest services wire fraud carries a sentence of up to 20 years in prison, while the false statement charge has a maximum sentences of up to five years.
Idaho
Boise: State revenue from tax collections was $50 million below expectations for the first three months of the current fiscal year, but the state still has a $1.5 billion budget surplus, officials said Monday. The Legislative Services Office said September’s revenue was down about $11 million, with sales and corporate income taxes below predictions. That follows similar misses by small amounts on projections for July and August. Despite the $50 million drop, about 3.6%, in projected revenue for the first three months of this fiscal year, the state is still seeing revenue growth and bringing in more money compared to the same period last year – about $94 million more, or 7.5%. The Division of Financial Management also released a report earlier this month providing a snapshot of the state’s finances. Both reports include a $500 million income tax rebate this year approved by lawmakers in a special session in September, as well as an ongoing income and corporate tax cut that takes effect Jan. 1. The ongoing cut comes from creating a 5.8% flat tax that is expected to cut more than $100 million from revenue for the current fiscal year, which ends June 30. Those tax cuts came out of a budget surplus then estimated at about $2 billion.
Illinois
Sycamore: A mountain lion that was struck and killed last weekend along a highway will be analyzed by biologists seeking to uncover the rare animal’s origins, state wildlife officials said. The Illinois Department of Natural Resources said Monday the mountain lion died Sunday after being hit by a vehicle along Interstate 88 in DeKalb County. Illinois State Police recovered the carcass, which will undergo a necropsy and DNA analysis at the University of Illinois Champaign-Urbana. The DNR said that analysis will provide insight “about the animal, its place of origin, and exploratory movements across the Midwest.” DNR experts believe the mountain lion may be the same one recorded in late September by a trail camera on private property in northwestern Illinois’ Whiteside County, which abuts Iowa. Mountain lions were eliminated from Illinois prior to the 1870s due to habitat loss and hunting. They have been a protected species in Illinois since 2015.
Indiana
Indianapolis: Lt. Gov. Suzanne Crouch tested positive for COVID-19 after experiencing cold-like symptoms on Monday, according to her office. Crouch said in a Twitter post that she had “mild symptoms and will continue to work for Hoosiers from home while following all of Indiana’s COVID guidelines.” Crouch was at her home in Evansville after testing positive with the COVID-19 virus for the first time, said her office spokesman, Ron Green. Crouch, 70, received two initial doses of a COVID-19 vaccine in February 2021 and has since gotten a booster shot, Green said. Crouch has been lieutenant governor since 2017 as Republican Gov. Eric Holcomb’s running mate in both the 2016 and 2020 elections. She previously was state auditor for three years after serving nine years as a state legislator from Evansville.
Iowa
Cedar Rapids: U.S. Rep. Ashley Hinson was released Tuesday morning from a Cedar Rapids hospital where she was being treated for a kidney infection, her office said. Hinson spent two nights in UnityPoint St. Luke’s Hospital after being admitted Sunday evening, according to her office. “I am feeling much better, will continue resting at home, and look forward to getting out on the road to be with Iowans soon,” Hinson said in a statement Tuesday morning. A debate scheduled for Tuesday night between Hinson, a Republican, and her Democratic challenger, Liz Mathis, was canceled in light of Hinson’s medical emergency. Iowa PBS, which was hosting the debate, said there are no plans to reschedule the debate.
Kansas
Fairway: The grounds of a former Native American boarding school will be searched to determine if any Indigenous children were buried there, state officials said. The Kansas Historical Society, which owns the site in Fairway, is contracting with the University of Kansas Center for Research to conduct a ground-penetrating radar survey of the 12 acres to search for unmarked graves, The Kansas City Star reported. The current Shawnee Indian Mission historical site was one of hundreds of schools run by the government and religious groups in the 1800s and 1900s. Thousands of Native American children were forcibly taken from their homes and placed in such schools, with a goal of assimilating them into white American culture and Christianity. Leaders of the Shawnee Tribe and other tribes had requested a search of the Fairway site. But tribal officials said in a statement that they were not consulted about the Historical Society’s project proposal before it was announced. “We have requested formal consultation to address serious concerns about the motives of this project, potential deficiencies in the process that may render incomplete findings, and what plans may be for utilizing any results from the project,” the tribe said. Patrick Zollner, executive director of the historical society, responded that the Shawnee Tribe was the “first to know” about the project proposal. He said the society also contacted other tribes, including the Cheyenne and Arapaho tribes, Kaw Nation, Osage Nation and others. Zollner and Erinn Barcomb-Peterson, a spokeswoman with the University of Kansas, emphasized that consultation with the tribes is ongoing and that work will not proceed until that process is completed.
Kentucky
Frankfort: Education in Kentucky faces its own difficult recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, a grim fact revealed Tuesday by statewide test scores showing that many students from elementary to high school struggled across a span of core subjects. Fewer than half of students tested statewide were reading at grade level, with even lower across-the-board scores posted in math, science and social studies. Education Commissioner Jason Glass acknowledged there’s “no quick fix” to overcome challenges caused by the pandemic, when schools shifted to virtual learning and staff shortages were common. The recovery in education will take “time and resources,” he stressed. “As expected, the COVID-19 pandemic has had a profound impact on our students and our schools as they continue to recover from the interrupted learning that occurred over the past two years,” Glass said in a news release. “These assessment results will serve as the baseline from which we will move forward as we look to new and innovative learning opportunities for all of Kentucky’s students.” Kentucky has received more than $2 billion in federal funding through the Democratic-backed American Rescue Plan passed by Congress last year. The funding aims to help accelerate learning and provide additional support to districts and the students who need it the most. Kentucky’s results are consistent with what many other states are experiencing, Glass said.
Louisiana
Baton Rouge: A shipwreck has emerged along the banks of the Mississippi River in Baton Rouge as water levels plummet – threatening to reach record lows in some areas. The ship, which archaeologists believe to be a ferry that sunk in the late 1800s to early 1900s, was spotted by a Baton Rouge resident walking along the shore earlier this month. The discovery is the latest to surface from ebbing waters caused by drought. During the summer, receding waters in the Lake Mead National Recreation Area revealed several skeletal remains, countless desiccated fish, a graveyard of forgotten boats and even a sunken World War II-era craft that once surveyed the lake. “Eventually the river will come back up and (the ship) will go back underwater,” said Chip McGimsey, the Louisiana state archeologist, who has been surveying the wreck during the past two weeks. “That’s part of the reason for making the big effort to document it this time – cause she may not be there the next time.” McGimsey believes that the ship may be the Brookhill Ferry, which likely carried people and horse-drawn wagons from one-side of the river to the other – before major bridges spanned the mighty Mississippi. Newspaper archives indicate that the ship sank in 1915 during a major storm. But this is not the first time the low water levels have revealed the ship. McGimsey said that tiny parts of the vessel were exposed in 1990s.
Maine
Bangor: A police officer was justified in shooting a man in Bangor, despite a review of evidence that showed the officer was farther away from the man than previously thought, the state’s attorney general said. Attorney General Aaron Frey conducted a second review of the shooting of Brian Barker, who was shot three times and survived in 2018. Frey said Friday that his office determined that the officer was more than 37 feet away from Barker and not about 15 feet as it initially stated. Frey said Barker’s movements leading up to the shooting still represented enough of a threat to justify the use of deadly force, the Bangor Daily News reported. Bangor police officers were checking on Barker and saw that he had a knife, which they repeatedly asked him to put down. Frey said Barker’s movements before the shooting made it unclear if he was going to attempt to attack one of the officers on the scene, the Daily News reported. The 21-foot distance marker between officers and a suspect is sometimes referred to as “kill zone” because officers are taught that at that distance an armed person can quickly close the distance.
Maryland
Annapolis: Gov. Larry Hogan announced an investment of $77 million on Monday for realignment and upgrades to the state’s section of U.S. 219 in Garrett County. Hogan said Monday that the plan advances his pledge to address Maryland’s portion of the U.S. 219 corridor between Interstate 68 and Meyerdale, Pennsylvania, to improve safety, expand economic opportunity, and reinforce the regional supply chain. Hogan also officially dedicated the portion of U.S. 219 in Maryland to retiring state Sen. George Edwards. He cited the senator’s support for improvements that benefit the region. The latest improvements to Maryland’s portion of U.S. 219 will renovate and expand the 1-mile segment between Old Salisbury Road and the Pennsylvania state line. In 2021, the Maryland Department of Transportation State Highway Administration completed the first phase, which included nearly $65 million of upgrades along U.S. 219 between I-68 and Old Salisbury Road. Finishing the second phase has been identified as Garrett County’s top transportation priority.
Massachusetts
Plympton: Striking truckers used tractor-trailers to block the exits at New England’s largest wholesale food distributor Monday and prevented some employees from leaving, resulting in as many as 20 arrests, police said. More than 400 Teamster union members arrived at the Sysco facility in Plympton, Massachusetts, in the early morning and stopped about 100 employees from leaving, Police Chief Matthew Ahl said in a statement. Police spent two hours negotiating with picketers. “After the attempted negotiation to move union members out of the roadway to create a safe passable environment, unfortunately we had to respond by removing members of the crowd who were inciting a hostile picket line,” the chief said. Sixteen to 20 people were arrested on charges including disorderly conduct and assault and battery, he said. After the arrests, traffic started to flow safely. About 300 Sysco drivers represented by the Teamsters Local 653 started their strike Oct. 1 seeking better pay and benefits. Voicemails seeking comment were left with union representatives.
Michigan
Sturgis: The U.S. Supreme Court has said it would hear arguments brought by a deaf Michigan man who wants to sue his former school district for failing to provide him a suitable teacher who knew sign language for more than a decade and inflating his grades when he could neither read nor write. Miguel Perez, an immigrant who moved to the U.S. with his family as a child and is now in his 20s, has been trying for years to press a claim for compensatory damages under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) against the Sturgis Public School District in southwest Michigan. But lower courts, including the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 6th Circuit in Cincinnati, have rejected that claim, saying Perez never exhausted the administrative review required first under another federal law, the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA). No date has been set for oral arguments before the Supreme Court.
Minnesota
St. Paul: Enbridge Energy, the owner and operator of the Line 3 pipeline project in northern Minnesota, will pay more than $11 million after investigations identified water quality violations and three aquifer breaches related to the pipeline’s construction, state regulators said Monday. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and Department of Natural Resources announced the results from investigations of water quality violations and aquifer breaches related to the construction project. Combined with the previous DNR actions, and in partnership with Fond du Lac Band of Lake Superior Chippewa, the investigations have resulted in more than $11 million in payments, environmental projects, and financial assurances from Enbridge, according to the state agencies. The Minnesota agency investigation found that Enbridge violated regulations when it discharged construction storm water into wetlands and inadvertently releasing drilling mud into surface water at 12 locations in June and August of 2021. The DNR also finalized agreements with Enbridge to address three aquifer breaches related to Line 3 construction.
Mississippi
Jackson: Congress is investigating the crisis that left 150,000 people in the capital city without running water for several days in late summer, according to a letter sent to Gov. Tate Reeves by two Democratic officials. Reps. Bennie Thompson, of Mississippi, and Carolyn Maloney, of New York, sent the letter Monday requesting information on how Mississippi plans to spend $10 billion from the American Rescue Plan Act and from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, and $429 million “specifically allotted to enhance the state’s water infrastructure.” The letter indicates “the start of a joint investigation” by the House Homeland Security and the Oversight and Reform committees into a crisis that deprived Jackson’s 150,000 residents of running water for several days in late August and early September, Adam Comis, a staffer for the committee, told The Associated Press. Thompson’s district includes most of Jackson, and he chairs the Homeland Security Committee. Maloney chairs the Oversight and Reform Committee. Jackson has had water problems for years, and the latest troubles began in late August after heavy rainfall exacerbated problems in the city’s main treatment plant, leaving many customers without running water. Jackson had already been under a boil-water notice since late July because the state health department found cloudy water that could make people ill. Running water was restored within days, and a boil-water notice was lifted in mid-September, but the letter to Reeves says “water plant infrastructure in the city remains precarious, and risks to Jackson’s residents persist.”
Missouri
Springfield: Libraries receiving state funds would be required to determine what material is “age-appropriate” and restrict minors from accessing some books under a proposed rule submitted by the secretary of state Monday. The proposed rule, submitted by Secretary of State Jay Ashcroft, would also allow parents to challenge a library’s “age-appropriate” designation, and ban state funds from being used to “purchase or acquire materials in any form that appeal to the prurient interest of any minor.” Libraries that receive state funds could see them cut off if they violate the proposed rule. “When state dollars are involved, we want to bring back local control and parental involvement in determining what children are exposed to,” Ashcroft, a Republican, said in a statement. “Foremost, we want to protect our children.” After the rule is formally published in the state register on Nov. 15, residents will be able to submit public comment on it for 30 days. Ashcroft cited state laws that gives his office authority for rulemaking over library funds when he filed the rule. Under the rule, libraries will have to adopt a “written, publicly-accessible” policy determining “how selections are made in considering the appropriateness for the age and maturity level of any minor ... who accesses any material in any form.” That policy will also allow parents and guardians to know what materials are available, and bans library employees from allowing minors to access those materials without a parent or guardian’s permission.
Montana
Helena: A federal administrative law judge has denied a request to block permits that expand bison grazing in north-central Montana while several parties challenge them. Gov. Greg Gianforte, Attorney General Austin Knudsen and the Montana Stockgrowers Association asked the U.S. Interior Department’s hearing division in August to reverse the the U.S. Bureau of Land Management’s granting of the permits. Administrative Law Judge Veronica Larvie ruled on Oct. 13 that while there were several concerns about the permits, the parties failed to show that the expanded bison grazing would cause immediate and irreparable harm and she declined to block them while the case moves forward. The Stockgrowers argue additional bison grazing will harm the cattle industry and the local economy. The conservation group American Prairie sought the 10-year permits to remove some fences so bison could roam more freely in Phillips County south of Malta. The grazing area in dispute covers about 108 square miles. It will allow American Prairie to increase the size of its bison herd from about 800 animals to 1,000 bison by 2025, the group said.
Nebraska
Grand Island: The body of a Texas woman found in the trunk of a car that crashed in south-central Nebraska during a police chase was the mother of the teenage driver, police have confirmed. The crash happened Friday along Interstate 80 near Grand Island, shortly after authorities were alerted to be on the lookout for a vehicle out of Texas believed to be involved in a possible homicide there, the Nebraska State Patrol said. A trooper spotted the car minutes later and attempted to stop it, but the driver refused to pull over and a chase ensued reaching speeds of more than 110 mph, the patrol said. The car soon crashed, and the 17-year-old driver suffered serious but non-lethal injuries, police said. Police also found the body of a woman in the car’s trunk. The following day, the patrol identified the woman as 49-year-old Michelle Roenz, of Harris County, Texas. The Harris County Sheriff’s Office confirmed Monday she is the mother of the 17-year-old boy who was driving the car. No charges against the teen appeared Monday in Nebraska online court records.
Nevada
Reno: A 47-year-old man will spend up to 15 years in prison for sending death threats to a half-dozen Nevada elected officials in messages citing false conspiracy theories that the 2020 election was stolen. Matthew Carter was found guilty in September of three felony counts of aggravated talking and one count of misdemeanor harassment. Washoe County District Judge Egan Walker sentenced him last week to two to five years for each felony, to be served consecutively. Walker also sentenced Carter to six months for the misdemeanor but said it can be served concurrently, meaning at the same time as the other sentences. Nevada Attorney General Aaron Ford said Monday that Carter sent multiple racist and threatening messages to U.S. Attorney Jason Frierson, state Treasurer Zach Conine, three members of the Nevada Assembly and Gov. Steve Sisolak’s chief of staff Yvanna Cancela. Frierson previously served as speaker of the Assembly and Cancela previously served as a state senator. The others targeted were Assembly members Steve Yeager, Lesley Cohen and Brittney Miller. Ford said the threats, which included racial slurs and references toward lynching, cited passage of expanded mail-in voting ahead of the election as a reason for his promised violence toward the officials.
New Hampshire
Atkinson: A laboratory equipment distributor has been fined $140,000 on 14 felony counts of failing to file export information on shipments to Russia and Ukraine between 2015 and 2019. Intertech Trading Corporation, in Atkinson, pleaded guilty to falsely describing the nature and value of the exported items on commercial invoices and shipping forms, the U.S. attorney’s office in New Hampshire said. In its plea agreement filed in July, Intertech said that it used false descriptions such as “lamp for aquarium” or “spares for welding system,” rather than accurately identifying the sophisticated scientific equipment actually contained in the shipments. Intertech, which was sentenced in federal court Monday, admitted that it drastically undervalued the shipments, thereby evading the requirement to file Electronic Export Information, which would have been reported to the departments of Commerce and Homeland Security, the U.S. attorney’s office said. The company’s actions jeopardized national security, said Joseph Bonavolonta, special agent in charge of the FBI Boston Division. Intertech “had an unblemished record in the industry for more than 30 years and has been devastated financially” by the government’s investigation and the resulting plea agreement, its attorney said in a court document.
New Jersey
Trenton: The state Supreme Court got two new members Monday. The Democrat-led state Senate confirmed Rachel Wainer Apter and Douglas Fasciale to fill two of three vacancies on the state’s highest court. Wainer Apter is currently the head of the civil rights division within the state attorney general’s office and previously served as counsel to the attorney general. Fasciale has been serving a temporary assignment on the high court since mandatory retirements left openings. He served as a judge on the Appellate Division since 2010 and was a state Superior Court judge from 2004 to 2010. Murphy appointed Wainer Apter, a Democrat, in 2021, but her nomination was held up as state senators vetted her appointment. Murphy appointed Fasciale, a Republican, last month. Their appointments track with a New Jersey tradition of governors appointing no more than four members from their own party. “This prevents the Court from lurching too far in one direction or the other. It forces Governors to select nominees from among the best lawyers and judges in the state, regardless of party,” Murphy said when he appointed Fasciale. The seven-member court still has one more vacancy, which Murphy must fill and the Senate confirm.
New Mexico
Albuquerque: The New Mexico Civil Guard has been barred from publicly acting as a military unit without authorization or assuming the role of law enforcement by using organized force at public protests or gathering, according to a newspaper. The Albuquerque Journal reported Tuesday that District Court Judge Elaine Lujan also has banned such activity by the group’s directors, officers, agents, employees, members and any of their successor organizations and members. Lujan granting a motion by Bernalillo County District Attorney Raúl Torrez, who told the Journal that the decision, “fundamentally represents a victory for the rule of law….We’re trying to prevent violent extremism.”A lawsuit alleged members of the New Mexico Civil Guard violated state law by exercising or attempting to exercise the functions of a peace officer without authority and have organized and operated as a military unit without having been called to military service by the governor, according to the Journal. The newspaper said the governor has exclusive authority under the state Constitution to call on the militia to keep the public peace.
New York
New York City: Thieves stole 20 cars from a dealership and will likely use the vechicles to commit other crimes, a top police official said. The car thieves hit a Mistubishi dealership over the weekend, broke open a lock box that held keys and drove off with late-model cars, NYPD Chief of Detectives James Essig said Monday. While some stolen cars are sold overseas, Essig said investigators believe the cars stolen from the Mitsubishi lot will be used to carry out other crimes. “Our feeling is just based on the way crime is going, people taking these cars, they will use these 20 cars in multiple robberies and burglaries throughout the city, switching plates on and off and on and off,” Essig told reporters. Employees did not realize the cars were gone until they came in Monday morning, the chief said. One of the stolen cars was recovered in Brooklyn, he said.
North Carolina
Raleigh: With abortions in the state and the number of out-of-state clinic patients soaring after Roe v. Wade was struck down, judges should permit more trained health professionals to prescribe pills for medication-induced abortions, plaintiffs in a lawsuit wrote on Monday. Abortion providers, medical workers and an abortion-rights group awaiting trial next year in their 2020 lawsuit challenging many state abortion rules asked a three-judge panel to act now and block a law limiting who can provide such medication from just certain licensed physicians. Allowing physician assistants, nurse practitioners and certified nurse midwives who work at certified abortion clinics to prescribe these pills would immediately expand access to abortion in North Carolina, the plaintiffs said. These “advanced practice clinicians” already can prescribe the same two medicines used in medication-induced abortions for managing a patient’s miscarriage, according to a memo describing the legal grounds for a preliminary injunction. The court should remove “an unnecessary barrier to care so that more North Carolinians can access a full range of reproductive health services, including time-sensitive abortion care, in their own state,” Anne Logan Bass, a nurse practitioner at Planned Parenthood South Atlantic, and a plaintiff, said in a news release. North Carolina abortion clinic operators have said they’ve seen a marked increase in the number of women coming from other states that now have more severe abortion limitations following the U.S. Supreme Court decision in June.
North Dakota
Almont: A UPS driver came to the rescue of two people who crashed their vehicle in a rural area of Morton County, the Bismarck Tribune reports. According to the shipping company, Ken Oakes was making deliveries Sept. 20 when he came upon a crashed car on a bridge east of Almont. Oakes, an Army veteran with medical training, helped a female passenger and a male passenger out of the vehicle and continued to help when paramedics arrived, according to the news outlet. “He was amazingly helpful,” said Frank Melchior, an emergency medical technician with the Almont Ambulance Service.
Ohio
Columbus: Patrol Superintendent Charles Jones announced Friday that the Ohio State Highway Patrol would permit troopers to have tattoos on their arms but they’ll have to wear long-sleeve uniforms − even in the heat of summer − to cover the ink. The patrol’s policy still prohibits tattoos above the neckline or below the wrist. Exceptions may be allowed for “a conservative wedding band/civil union tattoo, brand or body art” on the ring finger, the policy states. Police departments across the state and the nation are relaxing their grooming rules in an effort to recruit employees. Columbus, Akron and Cleveland police departments recently announced new policies. Patrol Academy Commandant Major John Altman, who declined to disclose whether he has tattoos, said the new tattoo policy means the patrol can reach out to several hundred potential recruits who expressed interest but also said they have visible tattoos. Altman noted that there are no current plans to change the patrol’s policy that prohibits facial hair.
Oklahoma
Pauls Valley: A politically connected attorney who served as Gov. Kevin Stitt’s hospital surge plan adviser during the pandemic was accused Monday in a drug trafficking charge of illegal involvement in marijuana businesses. Matt Stacy, 43, became the latest attorney to be accused of helping out-of-state clients establish marijuana grow operations by finding them “ghost” owners in Oklahoma. Stitt on Monday said he will be donating Stacy’s contribution to his reelection campaign to charity. Stacy, a lieutenant colonel in the Oklahoma Army National Guard, donated $2,900 to Stitt last year. Stacy was charged Monday in Garvin County District Court with 13 felony counts after being indicted last month by the state’s multicounty grand jury. Stacy “has acted as a consigliere to international drug trafficking organizations engaged in industrial-scale black-market marijuana manufacturing and trafficking,” a state narcotics investigator alleged in an affidavit filed with the charge. The illegal conduct included “structuring fraudulent ‘straw’ ownership schemes to circumvent Oklahoma ownership disclosure and structure requirements for medical marijuana businesses,” the agent with the Oklahoma Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs Control alleged. State law requires a licensed grow operation to be at least 75% owned by Oklahoma residents. “On multiple occasions, Stacy created and/or facilitated the creation of business entities through the use or recruitment of Oklahoma residents to operate as ‘straw owners’ to facially satisfy the Oklahoma residency requirements.” the agent alleged. One grower reported paying Stacy $60,000, according to the affidavit.
Oregon
Portland: Two people have together been awarded $10.4 million at trial after a jury found they suffered hearing loss and emotional trauma when they narrowly escaped a natural gas explosion in Portland. Lawyers for gas leak investigator Eric Rader and stylist Kristen Prentice said both suffered life-altering changes, including post-traumatic stress disorder, after an excavator hit a buried gas pipeline Oct. 19, 2016. Rader had found high levels of gas inside a corner bagel shop and warned firefighters to flee shortly before the blast obliterated the three-story commercial building and gutted a neighboring structure. “The reading on his gas meter indicated extreme risk,” said Greg Kafoury, the attorney for Rader and Prentice. “Rader notified nearby first responders, saving many.” Prentice was about to enter the salon next door when firefighters alerted her to the danger. Both took shelter nearby. Rader and Prentice are now permanently afflicted with hearing loss and painful sensitivity to loud noises, Kafoury said. Their lawsuits were tried jointly in Multnomah County Circuit Court. On Thursday, a jury awarded $6.5 million to Prentice and $3.9 million to Rader – the largest payout to date over the blast. Jurors found contractor Loy Clark Pipeline Co. liable for both of the workers’ medical expenses and lost earnings. Each award included $2.3 million in punitive damages, though about 70% of that money will be directed to a state crime victims fund under Oregon law.
Pennsylvania
Newtown: Political signs in southeastern Pennsylvania have been found booby-trapped with razor blades, which resulted in sliced fingers for one resident, police said. Upper Makefield Township police said Sunday that a campaign sign for Democratic gubernatorial candidate Josh Shapiro was placed without permission on someone’s property, and while trying to remove it the resident found that razor blades had been “placed around the perimeter of the sign.” “Obviously, this was designed to inflict punishment on anyone who attempted to remove the sign,” police said in a social media post. Police said they inspected all campaign signs and found razor blades placed around the perimeter of signs for two other Democratic candidates, John Fetterman and Ashley Ehasz. Fetterman is running for U.S. Senate and Ehasz for U.S. House. Police said their investigation continues and warned residents to exercise caution in removing signs placed on their property without permission, and to call them if “any implements” have been installed on the signs.
Rhode Island
Providence: A lawsuit brought by Rhode Island’s cities and towns against consulting giant McKinsey & Company over its alleged role in fueling the opioid crisis through deceptive marketing practices will be heard in federal court in Northern California. Towns across the state joined their brethren in Pennsylvania, Utah, Wisconsin and elsewhere in accusing McKinsey of engaging in a racketeering conspiracy by advising Purdue Pharma how to downplay the dangers of Oxycontin while maximizing sales of the prescription painkiller. The communities charge that McKinsey’s misconduct has perpetuated a serious public-health crisis that brought about significant economic damages, including spiking costs related to public health, opioid-related crimes, emergencies and public-safety challenges.
South Carolina
Anderson: Eight Starbucks employees, three of whom were fired by the company, have filed a defamation lawsuit against Starbucks and a former manager, Melissa Morris, who accused the employees of kidnapping and assault prior to the start of a shift in early August. A summons for the lawsuit was filed on Oct. 17 after the Anderson County Sheriff’s Office found that Morris’ criminal accusation was false, according to the summons. On Aug. 1, eight employees at a Starbucks in Anderson surrounded a store manager and presented a list of demands that included better pay, equipment upgrades and better staffing, according to Mya Ourada, a store barista at the time. On Aug. 3, Morris, the Starbucks store manager, in coordination with Starbucks management reported to police that the workers had assaulted and kidnapped the manager on Aug. 1, according to the summons. According to the summons, the Sheriff’s Office told a reporter, “None of the allegations were true... The employees did not stop her from leaving and did not put their hands on her, which is what the boss reported had happened.” “Starbucks knew exactly what they were doing when it smeared our reputation, painting us as criminals,” Aneil Tripathi, a former employee who was fired, said in a press release. “They abused the law enforcement process to intimidate us and keep us terrified that a knock on the door would be the Anderson police coming to take us away.” Starbucks and Morris have 30 days to answer the claims in the summons. “We are reviewing the details of this matter and look forward to defending the company against the allegations made,” a Starbucks spokesperson wrote in an email to the Independent Mail. “No Starbucks partner has been or will be disciplined for supporting or engaging in lawful union activity – but interests in a union does not exempt partners from following policies and procedures that apply to all partners.”
South Dakota
Sioux Falls: The City Council passed a group of ordinances and resolutions Tuesday, approving a TIF district that a local developer hopes will aid in creating an affordable housing development in eastern Sioux Falls. The $2.14 million TIF agreement passed the council 7-1 at their meeting, alongside resolutions that formally set the boundaries of the district, as well as approving the project plan for the development.Developer Kelly Nielson told councilors last month he’d been trying to work on a project like this for years, and that his staff had recently “started designing the least expensive house we could come up with.” Each of the 65 homes in the 9.7-acre development must be priced at or below $340,000, with two-bedroom, one-bathroom houses set at a price goal of $232,000 or below, and two-bedroom, two-bathroom units in a twin home with an unfinished basement set at a price goal of $323,000 or below. All of the homes would all need to be constructed by May 1, 2028, Business Development Coordinator Dustin Powers told councilors at the meeting.
Tennessee
Brentwood: A small plane crashed Tuesday on a road in a Nashville suburb, killing one person, authorities said. The pilot was the only person on board the single-engine plane that crashed in Brentwood at 7:30 a.m., the Federal Aviation Administration said in a statement. Brentwood police confirmed one fatality but didn’t immediately indicate whether the person who died was on the plane. Police said on Twitter that the two-lane road in the community just south of Nashville was closed afterward. The FAA and the National Transportation Safety Board are investigating the cause of the crash.
Texas
Houston: A man was convicted of capital murder on Monday in the 2019 shooting death of a law enforcement officer who was the first Sikh deputy in his agency. A jury took less than 30 minutes before finding Robert Solis, 50, guilty in the killing of Harris County Sheriff’s Deputy Sandeep Dhaliwal during a September 2019 traffic stop in a residential cul-de-sac 18 miles northwest of Houston. Authorities say the 42-year-old deputy was shot multiple times from behind after he stopped Solis and was walking back to his patrol car. The same jury in Houston that convicted Solis began hearing evidence late Monday afternoon in the trial’s punishment phase. Prosecutors are seeking a death sentence. Just before his trial began last week, Solis fired his court appointed attorneys and chose to represent himself. Solis testified in his own defense and told jurors he had accidentally shot Dhaliwal. Prosecutors argued Solis deliberately shot Dhaliwal because he didn’t want to go back to jail. At the time of the traffic stop, Solis had a warrant for violating parole. Dhaliwal was described by Harris County Sheriff Ed Gonzalez as “a trailblazer” because he was the first Sikh deputy with the sheriff’s office when he joined the force around 2009. Gonzalez’s predecessor as sheriff, Adrian Garcia, implemented a religious accommodation policy that allowed Dhaliwal to wear the traditional turban and beard of the Sikh religion.
Utah
Orem: U.S. Sen. Mike Lee of Utah worked to distinguish himself from former President Donald Trump in a contentious debate Monday evening. “I stood against my party time and time again to oppose reckless spending. I will do it again and again and again. We need people who say no,” the second-term Republican said. Lee repeatedly pointed to his voting record and twice told the audience at Utah Valley University that he voted less in line with Trump than all but two Republican senators – Rand Paul and Susan Collins. “To suggest that I’m beholden to either party, that I’ve been a bootlicker for either party is folly. And it’s contradicted by the plain facts,” Lee said. Lee faces a challenge from Evan McMullin, a former Republican known most for his long-shot bid for president six years ago, when as an independent he won 21.5% of voters in Utah, including Lee. McMullin has remained a pillar of the anti-Trump movement, attacking the former president as an authoritarian who poses a threat to democracy. Lee’s last minute efforts to put space between his voting record and Trump’s stances depart from his past messaging as Election Day nears.
Vermont
Brattleboro: A plan is being developed to turn part of the Winston Prouty Center for Child Family Development campus into as many as 300 housing units, the Brattleboro Reformer reports. “We’re pushing forward with it,” said Chloe Learey, executive director at the center. “Master planning is really that process of going through what are all the things we would want and what fits and what’s on the landscape and where are the wetlands and how much is it going to cost?” They hope to complete the plan in April, according to the news outlet. The design is intended “to build a neighborhood essentially,” Learey said. The planning process is estimated to cost $200,000. Grants and donations are being sought to assist with the project, the news outlet reports.
Virginia
Woodbridge: A couple, their 19-year-old daughter and a 36-year-old man were found dead in their home after a fellow resident, who is now charged with murder, called 911 to report a shooting, police said Tuesday. Prince William County Police officers responded to a Woodbridge home on Monday afternoon after a 911 caller reported that someone shot into the residence and people might be dead inside, Police Chief Peter Newsham said at a news conference near the home. When officers arrived, they found the door open and two men and two women dead in different parts of the home. “This is horrific,” Newsham said. “Every adjective that you can use to describe a tragedy, you can use to describe what happened here last night.” The evidence found on the scene didn’t match the details from the 911 caller, who turned out to be the suspect in the case, Newsham said. The caller – David Maine, 24, of Woodbridge – was found nearby. On Tuesday morning, Maine was charged with four counts of second-degree murder, Newsham said. Maine is being held without bond. The police chief identified the dead as Miguel Duran Flores, 44; Kelly Victoria Sotelo, 42; their daughter Karrie Ayline Sotelo, 19; and Richard Julio Jesus Revollar Corrales, 36, who lived in the basement of the home. Maine had a relationship with another resident, who was not at the home, Newsham said. That person has cooperated with police, providing valuable information, and is also upset about what happened at his home, he said.
Washington
Bremerton: Bremerton Municipal Court has shut down some public access to the court through the end of the month and cases may be continued, citing employee turnover and the COVID-19 pandemic for the court's inability to keep regular hours. The restrictions for Bremerton’s court make it the only court of limited jurisdiction in Kitsap County to institute new public access restrictions. The city courthouse was closed to the public starting on Monday, with all court hearings being held on Zoom. Court hearings will be limited, and cases will be continued as courtroom staffing allows, according to the emergency administrative order. The new restrictions could be updated or amended. Judge Tracy Flood, who took office in January, issued the emergency administrative order Sunday, citing “constantly changing issues” starting with the onset of pandemic restrictions and accommodations in March 2020.
West Virginia
Charleston: The Appalachian Regional Commission is granting $47 million to 52 projects aimed at economic diversification in communities affected by job losses in the coal industry. The funding, which comes from the commission’s POWER Initiative, will reach 181 counties. The funding is the largest to date since the initiative was launched in 2015, the commission said Monday in a statement. It is aimed at creating jobs, expanding skills training and attracting private investments to support industries such as agriculture, food and tourism. “Our coal-impacted communities are a vital part of Appalachia’s 13 states and 423 counties – when our coal communities thrive, our entire region is uplifted,” said ARC Federal Co-Chair Gayle Manchin. The POWER Initiative is funded by Congress and has invested $367 million in 447 projects throughout Appalachia, according to the commission. Hundreds of coal-fired power plants have shuttered over the last decade.
Wisconsin
Maple Grove: Sheriff’s investigators are willing to forgo any possible underage drinking violations in order to get more information about a bonfire explosion that injured more than a dozen people, including some critically, officials said Tuesday. The Shawano County Sheriff’s Office says as many as 40 current and former Pulaski High School students were at the bonfire Friday night in the Town of Maple Grove, which is about 25 miles south of Green Bay. The sheriff’s office believes the explosion was triggered when someone pushed a 55-gallon drum containing diesel fuel into the fire. Investigators say 17 people injured were p
Load-Date: October 18, 2022



End of Document


GRANTS PASS BOIL WATER ADVISORY LIFTED
US State News
October 18, 2022 Tuesday 9:32 AM  EST

Copyright 2022 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 346 words
Body




GRANTS PASS, Ore., Oct. 18 -- The City of Grants Pass issued the following news release:
Posted on: October 18, 2022
GRANTS PASS BOIL WATER ADVISORY LIFTED
Test results are negative, indicating there was no bacterial contamination to the water system, and the water is safe to drink.
For water utility customers in Grants Pass, yesterday's event serves as a good reminder to update your contact information with City's utility service, as that is how we contact utility customers in the event of an emergency. You may add or update your contact information via email here:cstsrvc@grantspassoregon.gov You may also call us at 541-450-6035 to add or update your information. Please note that the number appearing on your phone with such alerts from us will be: 541-787-4384.
Yesterday, we successfully sent calls to 7,244 utility customers. Today, we are notifying 7,918 customers; 674 customers have added or updated their information with us in the past 24 hours.
One can also sign up to receive general and emergency alerts from the City of Grants Pass here:https://www.grantspassoregon.gov/list.aspx?ListID=169. When we post press releases to the City's website, such as we did yesterday, subscribers will be notified by the methods they've chosen.
It's also important to sign up with the Citizen Alert system of Jackson and Josephine counties and to update phone numbers with that system once you're signed up.
Citizen Alert is a service that can send emergency messages to your residence or business landline (if you have one) and allows you to opt-in to receive notifications via phone calls, text messaging, e-mail, and more based on locations you care about. You can choose to receive notifications about events that may affect your home, workplace, family, schools, and more. The information you provide is protected and will not be used for any other purpose.
LINK TO REGISTER FOR CITIZEN ALERT:https://member.everbridge.net/1332612387832182/login For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
Load-Date: October 19, 2022



End of Document


Water crisis once again disrupts Hawaii military families’ lives
Army Times - Digital Edition
October 18, 2022 Tuesday 10:32 PM EST

Copyright 2022 Army Times  All Rights Reserved
Section: MILITARY NEWS
Length: 949 words
Byline: Karen Jowers
Body




Military families in Hawaii are once again picking up potable drinking water provided by base officials, as a major water line break has forced officials to issue a “boil water” advisory for drinking water.
It affects about 93,000 residents at Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, including Ford Island, Pearl Harbor, Hickam, Aliamanu Military Reservation, Red Hill, Camp Smith and Pearl City Peninsula. That includes service members from all branches, their families, and civilians. Repairs are expected to take another week.
Early on Oct. 14, a 36-inch water main broke at Pearl City Peninsula, followed by two smaller breaks in other areas, one of which was caused by a vehicle accident near the Navy Exchange. Then, on Monday, a fourth water line broke, said Navy Capt. Mark Sohaney, commander of Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, in a Facebook town hall. It was also in the Pearl City Peninsula area, he said, and everyone has water in the area of that fourth break, and no homes were flooded.
“The overall system remains low pressure, but stable,” he said.
The repair of the 36-inch major water main is the focus, and it’s complex, Sohaney said. “Fixing a line of this size presents an engineering challenge and there [haven’t] been any easy fixes,” he wrote in an Oct. 16 letter posted on Facebook.
The timeline for the repair is Oct. 25 -26, he said, adding that the materials are now in place to do the the work.
Residents can use the water for personal hygiene, officials said, although some residents have complained about the low water pressure making showering difficult. Water used for consumption, cooking, brushing teeth should be boiled — a rolling boil — for at least one minute. There’s a low possibility that the low water pressure could cause sediment or bacteria to get into the water, Sohaney said. Testing is being conducted each day, but results have been negative. Officials will let residents know if that changes, he said.
Officials say the water line breaks are not related to the incident in November, 2021, when the spill of an estimated 19,000 gallons of jet fuel at the massive Red Hill storage facility contaminated the Navy’s water distribution system. The Navy undertook a massive effort to purify the water and remove the fuel from water lines and homes.
The military is also beginning the process of removing the fuel from that storage facility, after defense officials agreed to shut it down permanently. Some 9,715 households in Army, Navy and Air Force neighborhoods — about 100,000 people overall — were affected, and were given the option of moving to hotels at government expense. Many lived in hotels for more than three months.
Military families sickened by toxic Hawaii water sue U.S. government
Now, many residents are back to picking up potable water being provided by base officials. Residents can pick up bottled water from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. at the Main Navy Exchange and at the Hickam Main exchange. Sohaney said the exchanges are keeping up with demand, and water is being delivered there each morning.
Residents are being asked to conserve water. Officials said a sudden surge in water usage before the repairs are complete could cause system-wide problems.
Commands at the joint base have been asked to use telework as much as possible to minimize manning and to only perform mission essential activities. Gyms, fitness centers and other morale, welfare and recreation center activities are closed as officials seek to minimize the number of people on the installation in order to conserve water. The dining facilities are operating as usual.
Residents are concerned about the closure of the child development centers, except for the Wahiawa center, which is located on an entirely different water system. Sohaney said officials, who are evaluating the situation day by day, hope to open one child development center on Wednesday for “absolute mission-essential personnel.” Schools, which are operated by the Hawaii Department of Education, were scheduled to be open on Tuesday.
Some families are also asking about being allowed to move to hotels until the water returns to normal. Officials note that the water is safe for bathing and doing laundry; and can be consumed if boiled for at least one minute.
But “this is too long for families to be without clean water,” said Kristina Baehr, an attorney representing some of the families who were affected by fuel contaminated water in the Navy water system.
“For this most recent event, immediately provide Temporary Lodging Assistance or hotel vouchers until water main repairs are complete,” she and her colleagues wrote in a letter to Navy officials.
They also noted that some families are continuing to report sheens and fuel in their water from the previous contamination. They asked for replacement of hot water heaters at every affected house and, for ongoing sicknesses, families be provided care by military occupational health and environmental medicine divisions.
Officials emphasized that the water line breaks are unrelated to the fuel leaks at Red Hill last year. “The fuel lines and water lines are completely separate and there is no concern of fuel leak or contamination in the drinking water as a result of the recent water main breaks,” officials stated on their information page.
But the work to empty the fuel lines at Red Hill has stopped because officials are trying to limit the number of people on the installation to decrease the amount of water being used, officials said. “Unpacking the fuel lines at Red Hill is an operation like many of the other operations that occur daily on JBPHH. Joint Task Force Red Hill is confident that the fuel in the tanks and the pipelines is currently stable.”
Load-Date: October 18, 2022



End of Document


Water crisis once again disrupts Hawaii military families’ lives
Marine Corps Times - Digital Edition
October 18, 2022 Tuesday 10:32 PM EST

Copyright 2022 Marine Corps Times  All Rights Reserved
Section: MILITARY NEWS
Length: 949 words
Byline: Karen Jowers
Body




Military families in Hawaii are once again picking up potable drinking water provided by base officials, as a major water line break has forced officials to issue a “boil water” advisory for drinking water.
It affects about 93,000 residents at Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, including Ford Island, Pearl Harbor, Hickam, Aliamanu Military Reservation, Red Hill, Camp Smith and Pearl City Peninsula. That includes service members from all branches, their families, and civilians. Repairs are expected to take another week.
Early on Oct. 14, a 36-inch water main broke at Pearl City Peninsula, followed by two smaller breaks in other areas, one of which was caused by a vehicle accident near the Navy Exchange. Then, on Monday, a fourth water line broke, said Navy Capt. Mark Sohaney, commander of Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, in a Facebook town hall. It was also in the Pearl City Peninsula area, he said, and everyone has water in the area of that fourth break, and no homes were flooded.
“The overall system remains low pressure, but stable,” he said.
The repair of the 36-inch major water main is the focus, and it’s complex, Sohaney said. “Fixing a line of this size presents an engineering challenge and there [haven’t] been any easy fixes,” he wrote in an Oct. 16 letter posted on Facebook.
The timeline for the repair is Oct. 25 -26, he said, adding that the materials are now in place to do the the work.
Residents can use the water for personal hygiene, officials said, although some residents have complained about the low water pressure making showering difficult. Water used for consumption, cooking, brushing teeth should be boiled — a rolling boil — for at least one minute. There’s a low possibility that the low water pressure could cause sediment or bacteria to get into the water, Sohaney said. Testing is being conducted each day, but results have been negative. Officials will let residents know if that changes, he said.
Officials say the water line breaks are not related to the incident in November, 2021, when the spill of an estimated 19,000 gallons of jet fuel at the massive Red Hill storage facility contaminated the Navy’s water distribution system. The Navy undertook a massive effort to purify the water and remove the fuel from water lines and homes.
The military is also beginning the process of removing the fuel from that storage facility, after defense officials agreed to shut it down permanently. Some 9,715 households in Army, Navy and Air Force neighborhoods — about 100,000 people overall — were affected, and were given the option of moving to hotels at government expense. Many lived in hotels for more than three months.
Military families sickened by toxic Hawaii water sue U.S. government
Now, many residents are back to picking up potable water being provided by base officials. Residents can pick up bottled water from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. at the Main Navy Exchange and at the Hickam Main exchange. Sohaney said the exchanges are keeping up with demand, and water is being delivered there each morning.
Residents are being asked to conserve water. Officials said a sudden surge in water usage before the repairs are complete could cause system-wide problems.
Commands at the joint base have been asked to use telework as much as possible to minimize manning and to only perform mission essential activities. Gyms, fitness centers and other morale, welfare and recreation center activities are closed as officials seek to minimize the number of people on the installation in order to conserve water. The dining facilities are operating as usual.
Residents are concerned about the closure of the child development centers, except for the Wahiawa center, which is located on an entirely different water system. Sohaney said officials, who are evaluating the situation day by day, hope to open one child development center on Wednesday for “absolute mission-essential personnel.” Schools, which are operated by the Hawaii Department of Education, were scheduled to be open on Tuesday.
Some families are also asking about being allowed to move to hotels until the water returns to normal. Officials note that the water is safe for bathing and doing laundry; and can be consumed if boiled for at least one minute.
But “this is too long for families to be without clean water,” said Kristina Baehr, an attorney representing some of the families who were affected by fuel contaminated water in the Navy water system.
“For this most recent event, immediately provide Temporary Lodging Assistance or hotel vouchers until water main repairs are complete,” she and her colleagues wrote in a letter to Navy officials.
They also noted that some families are continuing to report sheens and fuel in their water from the previous contamination. They asked for replacement of hot water heaters at every affected house and, for ongoing sicknesses, families be provided care by military occupational health and environmental medicine divisions.
Officials emphasized that the water line breaks are unrelated to the fuel leaks at Red Hill last year. “The fuel lines and water lines are completely separate and there is no concern of fuel leak or contamination in the drinking water as a result of the recent water main breaks,” officials stated on their information page.
But the work to empty the fuel lines at Red Hill has stopped because officials are trying to limit the number of people on the installation to decrease the amount of water being used, officials said. “Unpacking the fuel lines at Red Hill is an operation like many of the other operations that occur daily on JBPHH. Joint Task Force Red Hill is confident that the fuel in the tanks and the pipelines is currently stable.”
Load-Date: October 18, 2022



End of Document


Water crisis once again disrupts Hawaii military families’ lives
Navy Times - Digital Edition
October 18, 2022 Tuesday 10:32 PM EST

Copyright 2022 Navy Times  All Rights Reserved
Section: MILITARY NEWS
Length: 949 words
Byline: Karen Jowers
Body




Military families in Hawaii are once again picking up potable drinking water provided by base officials, as a major water line break has forced officials to issue a “boil water” advisory for drinking water.
It affects about 93,000 residents at Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, including Ford Island, Pearl Harbor, Hickam, Aliamanu Military Reservation, Red Hill, Camp Smith and Pearl City Peninsula. That includes service members from all branches, their families, and civilians. Repairs are expected to take another week.
Early on Oct. 14, a 36-inch water main broke at Pearl City Peninsula, followed by two smaller breaks in other areas, one of which was caused by a vehicle accident near the Navy Exchange. Then, on Monday, a fourth water line broke, said Navy Capt. Mark Sohaney, commander of Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, in a Facebook town hall. It was also in the Pearl City Peninsula area, he said, and everyone has water in the area of that fourth break, and no homes were flooded.
“The overall system remains low pressure, but stable,” he said.
The repair of the 36-inch major water main is the focus, and it’s complex, Sohaney said. “Fixing a line of this size presents an engineering challenge and there [haven’t] been any easy fixes,” he wrote in an Oct. 16 letter posted on Facebook.
The timeline for the repair is Oct. 25 -26, he said, adding that the materials are now in place to do the the work.
Residents can use the water for personal hygiene, officials said, although some residents have complained about the low water pressure making showering difficult. Water used for consumption, cooking, brushing teeth should be boiled — a rolling boil — for at least one minute. There’s a low possibility that the low water pressure could cause sediment or bacteria to get into the water, Sohaney said. Testing is being conducted each day, but results have been negative. Officials will let residents know if that changes, he said.
Officials say the water line breaks are not related to the incident in November, 2021, when the spill of an estimated 19,000 gallons of jet fuel at the massive Red Hill storage facility contaminated the Navy’s water distribution system. The Navy undertook a massive effort to purify the water and remove the fuel from water lines and homes.
The military is also beginning the process of removing the fuel from that storage facility, after defense officials agreed to shut it down permanently. Some 9,715 households in Army, Navy and Air Force neighborhoods — about 100,000 people overall — were affected, and were given the option of moving to hotels at government expense. Many lived in hotels for more than three months.
Military families sickened by toxic Hawaii water sue U.S. government
Now, many residents are back to picking up potable water being provided by base officials. Residents can pick up bottled water from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. at the Main Navy Exchange and at the Hickam Main exchange. Sohaney said the exchanges are keeping up with demand, and water is being delivered there each morning.
Residents are being asked to conserve water. Officials said a sudden surge in water usage before the repairs are complete could cause system-wide problems.
Commands at the joint base have been asked to use telework as much as possible to minimize manning and to only perform mission essential activities. Gyms, fitness centers and other morale, welfare and recreation center activities are closed as officials seek to minimize the number of people on the installation in order to conserve water. The dining facilities are operating as usual.
Residents are concerned about the closure of the child development centers, except for the Wahiawa center, which is located on an entirely different water system. Sohaney said officials, who are evaluating the situation day by day, hope to open one child development center on Wednesday for “absolute mission-essential personnel.” Schools, which are operated by the Hawaii Department of Education, were scheduled to be open on Tuesday.
Some families are also asking about being allowed to move to hotels until the water returns to normal. Officials note that the water is safe for bathing and doing laundry; and can be consumed if boiled for at least one minute.
But “this is too long for families to be without clean water,” said Kristina Baehr, an attorney representing some of the families who were affected by fuel contaminated water in the Navy water system.
“For this most recent event, immediately provide Temporary Lodging Assistance or hotel vouchers until water main repairs are complete,” she and her colleagues wrote in a letter to Navy officials.
They also noted that some families are continuing to report sheens and fuel in their water from the previous contamination. They asked for replacement of hot water heaters at every affected house and, for ongoing sicknesses, families be provided care by military occupational health and environmental medicine divisions.
Officials emphasized that the water line breaks are unrelated to the fuel leaks at Red Hill last year. “The fuel lines and water lines are completely separate and there is no concern of fuel leak or contamination in the drinking water as a result of the recent water main breaks,” officials stated on their information page.
But the work to empty the fuel lines at Red Hill has stopped because officials are trying to limit the number of people on the installation to decrease the amount of water being used, officials said. “Unpacking the fuel lines at Red Hill is an operation like many of the other operations that occur daily on JBPHH. Joint Task Force Red Hill is confident that the fuel in the tanks and the pipelines is currently stable.”
Load-Date: October 18, 2022



End of Document


Water crisis once again disrupts Hawaii military families’ lives
Air Force Times - Digital Edition
October 18, 2022 Tuesday 10:32 PM EST

Copyright 2022 Air Force Times  All Rights Reserved
Section: MILITARY NEWS
Length: 949 words
Byline: Karen Jowers
Body




Military families in Hawaii are once again picking up potable drinking water provided by base officials, as a major water line break has forced officials to issue a “boil water” advisory for drinking water.
It affects about 93,000 residents at Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, including Ford Island, Pearl Harbor, Hickam, Aliamanu Military Reservation, Red Hill, Camp Smith and Pearl City Peninsula. That includes service members from all branches, their families, and civilians. Repairs are expected to take another week.
Early on Oct. 14, a 36-inch water main broke at Pearl City Peninsula, followed by two smaller breaks in other areas, one of which was caused by a vehicle accident near the Navy Exchange. Then, on Monday, a fourth water line broke, said Navy Capt. Mark Sohaney, commander of Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, in a Facebook town hall. It was also in the Pearl City Peninsula area, he said, and everyone has water in the area of that fourth break, and no homes were flooded.
“The overall system remains low pressure, but stable,” he said.
The repair of the 36-inch major water main is the focus, and it’s complex, Sohaney said. “Fixing a line of this size presents an engineering challenge and there [haven’t] been any easy fixes,” he wrote in an Oct. 16 letter posted on Facebook.
The timeline for the repair is Oct. 25 -26, he said, adding that the materials are now in place to do the the work.
Residents can use the water for personal hygiene, officials said, although some residents have complained about the low water pressure making showering difficult. Water used for consumption, cooking, brushing teeth should be boiled — a rolling boil — for at least one minute. There’s a low possibility that the low water pressure could cause sediment or bacteria to get into the water, Sohaney said. Testing is being conducted each day, but results have been negative. Officials will let residents know if that changes, he said.
Officials say the water line breaks are not related to the incident in November, 2021, when the spill of an estimated 19,000 gallons of jet fuel at the massive Red Hill storage facility contaminated the Navy’s water distribution system. The Navy undertook a massive effort to purify the water and remove the fuel from water lines and homes.
The military is also beginning the process of removing the fuel from that storage facility, after defense officials agreed to shut it down permanently. Some 9,715 households in Army, Navy and Air Force neighborhoods — about 100,000 people overall — were affected, and were given the option of moving to hotels at government expense. Many lived in hotels for more than three months.
Military families sickened by toxic Hawaii water sue U.S. government
Now, many residents are back to picking up potable water being provided by base officials. Residents can pick up bottled water from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. at the Main Navy Exchange and at the Hickam Main exchange. Sohaney said the exchanges are keeping up with demand, and water is being delivered there each morning.
Residents are being asked to conserve water. Officials said a sudden surge in water usage before the repairs are complete could cause system-wide problems.
Commands at the joint base have been asked to use telework as much as possible to minimize manning and to only perform mission essential activities. Gyms, fitness centers and other morale, welfare and recreation center activities are closed as officials seek to minimize the number of people on the installation in order to conserve water. The dining facilities are operating as usual.
Residents are concerned about the closure of the child development centers, except for the Wahiawa center, which is located on an entirely different water system. Sohaney said officials, who are evaluating the situation day by day, hope to open one child development center on Wednesday for “absolute mission-essential personnel.” Schools, which are operated by the Hawaii Department of Education, were scheduled to be open on Tuesday.
Some families are also asking about being allowed to move to hotels until the water returns to normal. Officials note that the water is safe for bathing and doing laundry; and can be consumed if boiled for at least one minute.
But “this is too long for families to be without clean water,” said Kristina Baehr, an attorney representing some of the families who were affected by fuel contaminated water in the Navy water system.
“For this most recent event, immediately provide Temporary Lodging Assistance or hotel vouchers until water main repairs are complete,” she and her colleagues wrote in a letter to Navy officials.
They also noted that some families are continuing to report sheens and fuel in their water from the previous contamination. They asked for replacement of hot water heaters at every affected house and, for ongoing sicknesses, families be provided care by military occupational health and environmental medicine divisions.
Officials emphasized that the water line breaks are unrelated to the fuel leaks at Red Hill last year. “The fuel lines and water lines are completely separate and there is no concern of fuel leak or contamination in the drinking water as a result of the recent water main breaks,” officials stated on their information page.
But the work to empty the fuel lines at Red Hill has stopped because officials are trying to limit the number of people on the installation to decrease the amount of water being used, officials said. “Unpacking the fuel lines at Red Hill is an operation like many of the other operations that occur daily on JBPHH. Joint Task Force Red Hill is confident that the fuel in the tanks and the pipelines is currently stable.”
Load-Date: October 18, 2022



End of Document


Water crisis once again disrupts Hawaii military families’ lives
Military Times - Digital Edition
October 18, 2022 Tuesday 10:32 PM EST

Copyright 2022 Military Times  All Rights Reserved
Section: MILITARY NEWS
Length: 949 words
Byline: Karen Jowers
Body




Military families in Hawaii are once again picking up potable drinking water provided by base officials, as a major water line break has forced officials to issue a “boil water” advisory for drinking water.
It affects about 93,000 residents at Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, including Ford Island, Pearl Harbor, Hickam, Aliamanu Military Reservation, Red Hill, Camp Smith and Pearl City Peninsula. That includes service members from all branches, their families, and civilians. Repairs are expected to take another week.
Early on Oct. 14, a 36-inch water main broke at Pearl City Peninsula, followed by two smaller breaks in other areas, one of which was caused by a vehicle accident near the Navy Exchange. Then, on Monday, a fourth water line broke, said Navy Capt. Mark Sohaney, commander of Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, in a Facebook town hall. It was also in the Pearl City Peninsula area, he said, and everyone has water in the area of that fourth break, and no homes were flooded.
“The overall system remains low pressure, but stable,” he said.
The repair of the 36-inch major water main is the focus, and it’s complex, Sohaney said. “Fixing a line of this size presents an engineering challenge and there [haven’t] been any easy fixes,” he wrote in an Oct. 16 letter posted on Facebook.
The timeline for the repair is Oct. 25 -26, he said, adding that the materials are now in place to do the the work.
Residents can use the water for personal hygiene, officials said, although some residents have complained about the low water pressure making showering difficult. Water used for consumption, cooking, brushing teeth should be boiled — a rolling boil — for at least one minute. There’s a low possibility that the low water pressure could cause sediment or bacteria to get into the water, Sohaney said. Testing is being conducted each day, but results have been negative. Officials will let residents know if that changes, he said.
Officials say the water line breaks are not related to the incident in November, 2021, when the spill of an estimated 19,000 gallons of jet fuel at the massive Red Hill storage facility contaminated the Navy’s water distribution system. The Navy undertook a massive effort to purify the water and remove the fuel from water lines and homes.
The military is also beginning the process of removing the fuel from that storage facility, after defense officials agreed to shut it down permanently. Some 9,715 households in Army, Navy and Air Force neighborhoods — about 100,000 people overall — were affected, and were given the option of moving to hotels at government expense. Many lived in hotels for more than three months.
Military families sickened by toxic Hawaii water sue U.S. government
Now, many residents are back to picking up potable water being provided by base officials. Residents can pick up bottled water from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. at the Main Navy Exchange and at the Hickam Main exchange. Sohaney said the exchanges are keeping up with demand, and water is being delivered there each morning.
Residents are being asked to conserve water. Officials said a sudden surge in water usage before the repairs are complete could cause system-wide problems.
Commands at the joint base have been asked to use telework as much as possible to minimize manning and to only perform mission essential activities. Gyms, fitness centers and other morale, welfare and recreation center activities are closed as officials seek to minimize the number of people on the installation in order to conserve water. The dining facilities are operating as usual.
Residents are concerned about the closure of the child development centers, except for the Wahiawa center, which is located on an entirely different water system. Sohaney said officials, who are evaluating the situation day by day, hope to open one child development center on Wednesday for “absolute mission-essential personnel.” Schools, which are operated by the Hawaii Department of Education, were scheduled to be open on Tuesday.
Some families are also asking about being allowed to move to hotels until the water returns to normal. Officials note that the water is safe for bathing and doing laundry; and can be consumed if boiled for at least one minute.
But “this is too long for families to be without clean water,” said Kristina Baehr, an attorney representing some of the families who were affected by fuel contaminated water in the Navy water system.
“For this most recent event, immediately provide Temporary Lodging Assistance or hotel vouchers until water main repairs are complete,” she and her colleagues wrote in a letter to Navy officials.
They also noted that some families are continuing to report sheens and fuel in their water from the previous contamination. They asked for replacement of hot water heaters at every affected house and, for ongoing sicknesses, families be provided care by military occupational health and environmental medicine divisions.
Officials emphasized that the water line breaks are unrelated to the fuel leaks at Red Hill last year. “The fuel lines and water lines are completely separate and there is no concern of fuel leak or contamination in the drinking water as a result of the recent water main breaks,” officials stated on their information page.
But the work to empty the fuel lines at Red Hill has stopped because officials are trying to limit the number of people on the installation to decrease the amount of water being used, officials said. “Unpacking the fuel lines at Red Hill is an operation like many of the other operations that occur daily on JBPHH. Joint Task Force Red Hill is confident that the fuel in the tanks and the pipelines is currently stable.”
Load-Date: October 18, 2022



End of Document


PRECAUTIONARY BOIL WATER - SW 161ST LOOP - OCTOBER 19, 2022
US Fed News
October 19, 2022 Wednesday 9:32 AM  EST

Copyright 2022 HT Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Length: 192 words
Body




OCALA, Fla., Oct. 19 -- Marion County issued the following news release:
PRECAUTIONARY BOIL WATER NOTICE
Effective Date: 10/19/2022
Due to: 6" Water Main Repair
Marion County Utilities is issuing a boil water notice for the
Marion Oaks Community
For homes and businesses located on: 2756, 2748, 2741, 2735, 2736, 2731, 2695, 2696, 2691 SW 161st Loop
All residents must boil water used for consumption until the water is tested and results indicate your water is safe to drink. Water should be brought to a rapid boil one (1) minute before consumption. As an alternative bottled water may be used. This boil water notice applies to any water used for drinking, cooking, brushing teeth, etc. and is in effect until further notice. Water used for laundry, bathing and/or showering does not need to be boiled. Marion County Utilities will test your water and advise you when this boil water notice is lifted.
Please contact Marion County Utilities customer service if you have any questions and to update your phone number at 352-307-6000. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
Load-Date: October 20, 2022



End of Document


GOVERNOR RON DESANTIS ISSUES UPDATES ON HURRICANE IAN RECOVERY ON OCTOBER 19, 2022
States News Service
October 19, 2022 Wednesday

Copyright 2022 States News Service
Length: 5930 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: TALLAHASSEE, FL 
Body




The following information was released by the office of the Governor of Florida:
Today, Governor Ron DeSantis visited Sanibel Island to announce that repairs to the Sanibel Causeway have been completed more than a week ahead of schedule. As of this morning, access to Sanibel Island has been restored for residents, reconnecting Sanibel Island to the mainland. To watch the Governor's full remarks, click here.
Yesterday, First Lady Casey DeSantis announced an expansion of mental health resiliency tools in response to Hurricane Ian. The First Lady has also worked with the State Disaster Recovery Mental Health Coordinator, Sara Newhouse, to compile a comprehensive webpage of resources to help navigate available resources for mental health needs post hurricane. To visit the site, click here.
First Lady Casey DeSantis has continued to highlight the Florida Disaster Fund and the support it has received from private entities across the nation. The Florida Disaster Fund has raised over $45 million since activation. To read more, click here. To contribute, please visit www.FloridaDisasterFund.org or text DISASTER to 20222.
To guide Floridians looking for their next-steps as they rebuild, FloridaStormRelief.com has launched to serve as a one-stop-shop to navigate assistance that is available. This webpage highlights the resources available through the state's public and private partners, and faith-based organizations. Here you can find a step-by-step check list for Floridians recovering following Hurricane Ian, mental health resiliency resources and ways to help Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian. This website also has a list of resources available to help your business recover following the storm.
State response efforts include:
Florida Division of Emergency Management (FDEM)
At the request of Governor DeSantis, FDEM worked with federal partners to secure an additional 30 days of 100% federal cost share for Public Assistance Category A (debris removal) and Category B (emergency protective measures) for Hurricane Ian recovery efforts. More information can be found here.
Counties eligible for FEMA Individual Assistance include Brevard, Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Flagler, Glades, Hardee, Hendry, Highlands, Hillsborough, Lake, Lee, Manatee, Monroe, Okeechobee, Orange, Osceola, Palm Beach, Pasco, Pinellas, Polk, Putnam, Sarasota, Seminole, St. Johns and Volusia. Impacted residents can apply at DisasterAssistance.gov. As of October 17, there were 607,019 valid registrations with over $453 million approved.
FDEM has worked with FEMA to activate the Transitional Sheltering Assistance (TSA) Program for impacted residents in counties declared for FEMA Individual Assistance. FDEM will continue to work with FEMA to determine additional unmet needs for residents in newly declared counties for Individual Assistance. Individuals can apply for disaster assistance and may be eligible for TSA if they cannot return to their home.
USACE debris removal Subject Matter Experts are coordinating with city and county personnel to conduct volume estimates and mission analysis for debris removal in impacted areas.
The Crisis Cleanup Line, 800-451-1954, provides debris removal services to impacted residents, and has completed more than 1,000 requests to date.
In coordination with federal and state partners, more than 100 pets have been rescued through air operations from the Barrier Islands.
FDEM has activated the State Assistance Information Line (SAIL) to provide an additional resource for Floridians to receive up-to-date information regarding Hurricane Ian. Residents and visitors can call this toll-free hotline at 1-800-342-3557.
FDEM maintains 8 fuel depots across Central and Southwest Florida to provide fuel for first responders. A residential fuel depot is open at the Captiva Fire Department in North Captiva to provide fuel to individuals.
FDEM is mobilizing generators for Sanibel Island as infrastructure inspections are completed and facilities can begin operating.
FDEM is mobilizing pet food and supplies for displaced pets, including: rabies vaccines, dry and canned dog food, dry and canned cat food, cat litter, disposable pet bowls and disposable leashes.
120 critical lift stations at wastewater treatment plants have been brought back online in Lee County through the utilization of generators and/or pumps.
FDEM is in constant communication with all 67 county emergency management offices and state agencies to coordinate recovery actions and needed resources.
Power
Power has been restored to all accounts on the mainland which can receive it.
As of today, over 97% of accounts that can receive power on Pine Island have been restored, significantly ahead of the estimated restoration timeline.
For a full report on current outages, click here.
Internet Connectivity
If you are a Xfinity customer experiencing internet connectivity issues and you live in a predominately restored location and find that after restarting your modem your services are still not working, the lines delivering service to your home may be damaged. Please go to the Status Center to troubleshoot or use your Xfinity App to chat with a representative or call 1-800-XFINITY (1-800-934-6489) to report your service interruption.
ATandT is waiving talk, text, and data overage charges for ATandT Postpaid and PREPAID customers with billing addresses in 828 zip codes across Florida from September 28, 2022, through October 28, 2022, to keep customers connected before, during and after any major storm event. ATandT is welcoming other carriers' customers to roam on its networks so they can connect, even if their carrier's service isn't available after the storm. Since opening the ATandT network last week for roaming, we've handled about 47 TBs of traffic from other carriers to help keep those in impacted areas connected. 47 TBs of data is equal to more than 16 billion text messages. Store locations and hours are available at www.att.com/stores.
Comcast has Xfinity WiFi vans provide free internet connectivity as communities continue to recover from Hurricane Ian. Each Xfinity WiFi van can provide wireless internet connectivity to more than 1,000 users at one time over a 300-square-foot area. The vans will be available from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily at the following locations until further notice:
Cape Coral: Walmart Supercenter, 1619 Del Prado Boulevard South, Cape Coral, FL
Bonita Springs: Bonita Springs Public Library, 2687 Pine Ave., Bonita Springs, FL
Fort Myers: Walmart Supercenter, 17105 San Carlos Blvd., Fort Myers, FL
Port Charlotte: Walmart Neighborhood Market (Charlotte Square) at 2150 Tamiami Trail, Port Charlotte, FL
As residents of Southwest Florida continue to recover, Verizon is extending its support for counties most impacted by Hurricane Ian. Consumer and small business customers in the following counties will continue to receive unlimited calling, texting, and mobile data through October 31, 2022, in Charlotte, Collier, Desoto, Hardee, Lee, and Sarasota counties. Verizon has deployed three Wireless Emergency Connection Centers (WECCs) to assist Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian with wi-fi, phone batteries, and charging stations. These stations are available to any customer of any carrier stay connected. WECCs are available at the following locations:
Port Charlotte Town Center Mall, 1441 Tamiami Trail, Port Charlotte, FL (open 10:00 a.m. 6:00 p.m.)
Fort Myers Town Hall, 2525 Estero Boulevard, Fort Myers Beach, FL (open 8:00 a.m. 5:00 p.m.)
Lakes Regional Library 15290 Bass Road, Fort Myers, FL (open 9:00 a.m. 6:00 p.m.)
Fishers of Men Lutheran Church, 10360 Stringfellow Rd, St James City, FL (open 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily)
Additionally, charging pedestals are available at the following locations:
Estero Community Center, 9200 Corkscrew Palms Boulevard, Estero, FL 33928
Hertz Arena, 11000 Everblades Parkway, Estero, FL 33928
North Collier Regional Park, 15000 Livingston Road, Naples, FL 34116
1029 Diplomat Parkway East, Cape Coral, FL 33909
1039 Burnt Store Road, Cape Coral, FL 33993
Health and Human Services
The Florida Department of Health and Florida Department of Children and Families have partnered with BetterHelp to offer three months of free mental health services via online therapy to those impacted by Hurricane Ian. To access these free services, visit betterhelp.com/voucher and enter code: HurricaneIan. Visitors to BetterHelp's site will be prompted to answer a questionnaire that will match those impacted residents with a licensed mental health professional.
Boil Water Notices have been issued for 38 areas in over 9 counties, following the impacts from Hurricane Ian. DOH continues to monitor and maintain a comprehensive statewide list of notices for residents to access online.
DOH County Health Departments have been deployed to all Disaster Recovery Centers to provide services and resources. This includes Women and Infant Care, Vital Statistics, and other public health services. Costs for any vital statistics, such as birth and death certificates, have been waived.
DOH's Division of Children's Medical Services' Early Steps and Newborn Screening programs has sent additional supplies to Ft. Myers. Nearly 1,000 waterproof bags with essential supplies including hand sanitizer, silicone bibs, thermometers, baby spoons, and cooling towels for moms and babies to be distributed to families in impacted communities.
This will be package in Moms and Babies' waterproof bags and distributed to individuals in need.
Hope Heroes are volunteering in shelters, helping clean yard debris and tarping roofs for seniors. To become a Hope Hero and volunteer to help older Floridians, visit helpcreatehope.com.
Visits are being conducted at all health care facilities in counties impacted by Hurricane Ian. AHCA has completed 615 assessments at facilities in Brevard, Broward, Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Hardee, Highlands, Hillsborough, Lake, Lee, Manatee, Miami-Dade, Orange, Osceola, Palm Beach, Sarasota, Seminole, Volusia.
102 clients have received weather-related Emergency Home Assistance for the Elder Program funds to assist with individuals experiencing a home energy emergency in the affected areas.
Infrastructure
All accessible State-owned bridges have been inspected across Florida. FDOT continues to assist with inspections on locally owned bridges.
Access restored to Pine Island Bridge in just over 50 hours/ under 3 days.
Florida Tolls reinstated at 6 a.m. on Saturday, October 15, with the exception of Alligator Alley, Pinellas Bayway, and Sunshine Skyway. Tolls at those three facilities remain suspended.
Initial debris pick-up:
4,096 miles of state roads have been completed statewide.
Statewide 70,861 cubic yards of vegetation debris have been picked up.
Roadways (state roads and interstates)
Roads Closed as of 11 a.m. on 10/15/22
Brevard County
SR-46 Westbound at Hatbill Road Lane closed
Charlotte County
Bridge closed on Rotonda Boulevard both directions at Rotonda Boulevard South
DeSoto County
NW 2nd Bunker Avenue at Arrowhead Pond Road Lane closed, both directions
SR-72 Westbound beyond SR-70 All lanes closed
SR-72 from NW Pearce Street to SR-70 Lane closed
Hardee County
N Hollandtown Road at Thoroughbred Road Lane closed, both directions
SR-64 from Brantwood Drive to Wilbur C King Boulevard Lane closed, both directions
Highlands County
Golfview Road at Lake Drive Boulevard Lane closed, both directions
Marble Avenue from W Martin Road to S Lake Boulevard Lane closed, both directions
Lee County
Bonita Beach Road at Simmons Lane All lanes closed
Captiva Drive from Palmflower Lane to Sanibel Captiva Road Lane closed, both directions
CR-865 at Broadway Channel Lane closed, both directions
CR-865 from Estrellita Drive to Cape Hickory Court Lane closed, both directions
CR-867 Southbound from Port Comfort Road to Punta Rassa Road All lanes closed
Estero Boulevard at Broadway Channel Lane closed, both directions
Polk County
E Grove Avenue at S Scenic Highway Lane closed, both directions
Seminole County
SR-46 Eastbound at N Jungle Road Lane closed
Freight Rail
Seminole Gulf Railway sustained significant damage. Damage assessments continue and repair plans are underway. They are operating on their Sarasota line.
Mass Care
DCF launched the Disaster Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (D-SNAP), which is being implemented in phases by county. Phase one includes Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Hardee, Lee, Polk, and Sarasota counties. Phase two includes Flagler, Highlands, Manatee, Orange, Pinellas, and St. Johns. Pre-registration is required by all applicants.
As of October 19, 140,634 households have pre-registered. To expedite service to eligible households, DCF is offering phone interviews through the D-SNAP Call Center. Details can be found online at MyFLFamilies.com/DSNAP.
As of October 19, DCF has disbursed $41 million.
DBPR investigators and other staffers from across the state are at all the Disaster Recovery Centers in Charlotte, Collier, Lee and Sarasota Counties, helping with any licensing needs and educating the public about the importance of hiring a licensed contractor.
DCF has two new Family Resource Support Centers in Deltona and New Smyrna Beach. FRSCs are staffed with Hope Navigators, crisis counselors who specialize in disaster recovery response, and public benefit eligibility specialists to help individuals and families. More information can be found at MyFLFamilies.com/FRSC.
Florida Housing Finance Corporation has updated its Disaster Relief webpage to provide families with information on housing resources and assistance. This webpage will continue to be updated as more information becomes available. Disaster Relief Resources and Information (floridahousing.org).
Florida Housing has ensured that all current listings are up to date in the event that families need to quickly relocate at www.FloridaHousingSearch.org.
Each SHIP office has an adopted disaster strategy that allows for assistance in the immediate aftermath of a declared disaster. Strategies may include temporary relocation and rental assistance, debris removal and short-term repairs to prevent further damage to the structure or to allow for occupancy until further repairs are made. Please contact your local office directly for more information: Local Government Information (floridahousing.org)
Law Enforcement
FLHSMV has deployed Florida Licensing on Wheels (FLOW) mobile units to Lee, Charlotte, Sarasota, and Collier counties to provide no-fee replacements for driver license and identification credentials, vehicle registrations, and titles.
Dates, locations, and hours of operation for FLOW mobiles are subject to change and will be announced on FLHSMV.gov
FLOW Locations:
Sarasota County
Disaster Recovery Center
Shannon Staub Library
4675 Career Lane, North Port, FL 34289
Lee County
Disaster Recovery Center
Lakes Regional Library
15290 Bass Road, Fort Myers, FL 33919
Hertz Arena
11000 Everblades Parkway, Estero, FL 33928
Disaster Recovery Center
Joseph P. D'Alessandro Office Complex
2295 Victoria Ave., Ft. Myers, FL 33901
Charlotte County
Port Charlotte Town Center
1441 Tamiami Trail, Port Charlotte, FL 33948
Collier County
Disaster Recovery Center
Veterans Community Park
1895 Veterans Park Dr, Naples, FL 34110
o FLOW Hours of Operation: 9:00am 6:00pm, seven days a week
As of October 18, more than 4,600 customers have been served since operations began.
FDLE has four response teams and one logistical support team deployed in Lee and Charlotte counties checking in law enforcement officers reporting for duty, maintaining the base camps and matching law enforcement resources to the identified needs.
FHP's fixed-wing aircraft and unmanned aerial systems are aiding in FDOT's efforts as they continue to undertake bridge and other infrastructure repairs.
FHP continues to provide escorts for fuel, utility, and emergency response teams to provide critical resources to the impacted areas.
FHP is assisting multiple local agencies with law enforcement functions in the impacted areas.
More than 1,700 sworn FHP members are available to assist with enhanced response efforts.
Peer support is available 24/7 to all FHP members and their families through FHP's Peer Support Team and the FHP Wellness App to support their overall wellness.
FHP encourages motorists to report disabled vehicles or dangerous driving conditions to *FHP (*347).
FLHSMV driver license and motor vehicle service center closures can be found here.
FLHSMV has issued Emergency Order 092422, which:
Waives specific requirements for commercial motor vehicles providing emergency relief; and
Waives the replacement fees for driver's license and identification credentials, vehicle registrations and titles, vessel registrations and titles and temporary parking permits for impacted individuals.
The FWC has established a field base of operations in Lee County and deployed two mobile command centers and 6 BERG units to provide communications and operational support to officers in the area while they respond to calls for assistance.
A total of approximately 52 FWC officers and support personnel are currently deployed for Hurricane Ian response and recovery efforts.
A third wave of 34 FWC officers and 1 vehicle and vessel mechanic with a full complement of four-wheel drive vehicles, vessels and response and recovery equipment and supplies have arrived in Lee County.
17 FWC officers from across the state have deployed to assess and process thousands of vessels displaced due to the storm.
FWC officers are conducting 24-hour land-based and waterborne safety and security patrols around Sanibel Island and other barrier islands to protect people and property on the islands.
FWC Aviation Section is providing the State EOC with aerial assistance, reconnaissance and post-storm damage assessments.
The FWC has established a Hurricane Ian Vessel Hotline for vessel and property owners affected by vessels displaced by Hurricane Ian. The public is encouraged to call 850-488-5600 M-F, 8 a.m. 5 p.m. for more information about displaced vessels or vessels in state waters that have been rendered derelict by Hurricane Ian.
More than 1,300 vessels have been assessed by FWC displaced vessel teams.
If a vessel owner is removing their vessel, they should notify the Hurricane Ian Vessel Hotline of their plans for vessel removal by calling 850-488-5600 M-F, 8 a.m. 5 p.m.
FWC cautions all boaters to exercise extreme caution in waterways in areas affected by Hurricane Ian and encourages boaters to report missing or damaged waterway markers by calling 866-405-2869 or by filling out an online form at: https://myfwc.com/boating/waterway/markers/damaged-or-missing/.
Private Sector Support
Florida was approved for $30 million for the National Dislocated Worker Grant for Floridians without work due to Hurricane Ian, which DEO applied for through the U.S. Department of Labor on October 4, 2022.
Uber is offering free round-trip rides, up to $30 each way, to and from 10 state-approved Disaster Recovery Centers (DRC). At these centers, those whose livelihoods have been severely affected by Hurricane Ian will be able to apply for federal assistance and disaster loans, update applications, and learn about other resources available. Details on how to redeem a free round trip, up to $30 each way, to and from a state-approved DRC are available at www.FloridaDisaster.biz/CurrentDisasterUpdates.
Business Recovery Centers, represented by the U.S. Small Business Administration and the Florida Small Business Development Center network. Visit www.FloridaSBDC.org/disaster/loan-assistance/ to find a location near you.
Work search reporting and other requirements for Reemployment Assistance claims have been temporarily waived for Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian in FEMA disaster-declared counties. Eligible Floridians must file for regular state Reemployment Assistance benefits before applying for Disaster Unemployment Assistance (DUA). DUA is available for individuals and businesses in FEMA disaster-declared counties. Learn more here.
Over 14,800 DUA claims have been submitted since DUA was activated and more than 7,100 have been approved.
To support Floridians during this time, DEO has deployed personnel to the field and extended call center hours to seven days per week. Additionally, DEO secured six ID.me kiosks and support technicians to reduce the number of fraudulent claims. DEO is expanding the number of agents available to review and process claims.
All these efforts are focused on reducing the processing time so DUA benefits can be expedited to Floridians in need.
DEO and CareerSource Florida have activated the disaster recovery jobs portal to connect businesses and people impacted by Hurricane Ian with workforce programs. To look for employment opportunities or post disaster-related jobs to help rebuild Florida's communities impacted by Hurricane Ian, visit Florida's Disaster Recovery Jobs Portal at disasterrecovery.employflorida.com.
CareerSource Florida is working with DEO to support recovery efforts and help connect affected residents with temporary employment. All career centers are open statewide. To find your local career center, visit Find Your Local Team or Career Center Directory.
CareerSource South Florida and CareerSource Pasco Hernando locations have deployed mobile units to the Fort Myers Disaster Recovery Center.
CareerSource Southwest Florida has deployed volunteers to the Disaster Recovery Center to assist impacted individuals.
The Florida Small Business Emergency Bridge Loan Program has been activated to assist small businesses that have been impacted by Hurricane Ian with short-term, zero-interest loans to meet the businesses' immediate financial needs and "bridge the gap" until longer term funding sources become available. Small businesses in the most impacted counties will be escalated and prioritized as they are received. Visit www.FloridaJobs.org/EBL to learn more.
DEO is updating www.FloridaDisaster.biz with real-time information for business owners, their families, and employees for Hurricane Ian.
DEO's Rebuild Florida team continues to work with homeowners to assess any damage that may have occurred to Hurricane Irma projects from Hurricane Ian. The team continues to rotate deployed staff to Ian-impacted areas, supporting recovery efforts.
Enterprise Florida activated its Disaster Assistance page with a list of state and federal resources available for businesses to utilize in their mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery activities.
Airbnb has launched a special website to help Hurricane Ian Relocation efforts for impacted residents at Airbnb.com/hurricaneianflorida. The page features open (vacant and available for rent) properties that are available to be booked outside of the FEMA Disaster zones. As communities become fully restored with water and electricity, Airbnb will add more open properties.
For displaced residents of Lee and Charlotte counties, Airbnb is also working with their nonprofit partners to offer vouchers for temporary housing at Airbnb properties. To learn more about how the voucher program works, see Airbnb's full press release at https://news.airbnb.com/airbnb-org-hurricane-relief-efforts/.
DEO staff and volunteers are providing in-person services and surging resources to five Disaster Recover Center locations located in Lee, Charlotte, Sarasota, and Collier Counties. Locations for DRCs are available on www.FloridaDisaster.org.
Business Recovery Centers, represented by the U.S. Small Business Administration and the Florida Small Business Development Center network, are stationed at the following locations:
Chloe Coney Urban Enterprise Center, 1907 E Hillsborough Avenue, Tampa, FL (open Monday Friday from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.; open Saturday from 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.)
The HUB at SWFL INC, 25071 Chamber of Commerce Drive, Bonita Springs, FL (open Monday Sunday from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.)
The Naples Players, 701 5th Avenue South, Naples FL (open Monday from 9:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. and Tuesday Sunday from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.)
Sanford Information Center, 30 E 1st Street, Sanford, FL (open Monday Sunday from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.)
The Kiwanis Club, 360 Santa Barbara Boulevard South, Cape Coral, FL (opens at 10:00 a.m. on Monday, October 10, 2022)
Florida Department of Education (DOE)
All school districts impacted by Hurricane Ian have opened, less than three weeks after Hurricane Ian made landfall. More info can be found here.
Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
DEP is coordinating with FWC and USCG on derelict/displaced vessels.
DEP landfill strike team members along with EPA On-Scene Coordinator staff continue DDMS/Debris inspections.
299 Disaster Debris Management Sites have been authorized to operate for Hurricane Ian, including 70 in Lee, Charlotte and Sarasota counties. These sites are a critical component of expediting clean-up, reducing environmental and public health impacts, and meeting federal reimbursement requirements.
DEP staff are on the ground assessing water and wastewater infrastructure on some of the hardest hit areas Fort Myers Beach, Pine Island, Sanibel Island and Gasparilla Island, with resources from FlaWARN, US Army Corps of Engineers, local utilities and the Division of Emergency Management's contractor.
DEP is coordinating with FlaWARN and other response agencies on the dispatch of generators, fuel and pump trucks to assist drinking water and wastewater facilities to help get them operational as soon as possible.
Hazardous Area Response Teams have been deployed to aid with assessment and resources for addressing impacts to hazardous waste facilities in impacted areas.
Following the issuance of the Governor's Executive Order, DEP issued an Emergency Final Order waiving permitting requirements for the storage and processing of solid waste, including storm debris.
DEP has also issued an Emergency Final Order to expedite necessary repair, replacement and restoration of structures, equipment, surface water management systems, works and other systems damaged by the storm.
Nine Florida State Parks strike teams have been assembled to assist with assessment and recovery efforts at impacted parks. Three teams are on the ground today in impacted areas. Other teams will be deployed as conditions allow and needs are identified.
Licensing
DBPR Secretary Melanie S. Griffin is accompanying the Division of Regulation team in Charlotte County as they sweep neighborhoods assessing whether there is damage and looking for unlicensed contracting.
DOH's Board of Clinical Social Work, Marriage and Family Therapy, and Mental Health Counseling is increasing resources to expedite processing of licensure applications, ensuring greater availability of qualified mental health professionals.
DBPR Emergency Order 2022-04 waives the application fees associated with relocating or reopening certain businesses, including the addition of branch locations regulated by the Department or by any board, commission or division of the Department, where relocation or reopening arises from damages caused by Hurricane Ian in the listed counties.
DBPR Emergency Order 2022-03 waives the requirement for certified or registered, general, building, or residential contractors to subcontract roofing work for the repair or installation of any roof type in listed counties.
The emergency order clarifies that the installation of non-permanent, emergency tarps to relieve damage caused by Hurricane Ian fall within the exemptions listed in section 489.103(6).
Temporary Veterinarian License Application: The Florida Board of Veterinary Medicine has a 30-Day Temporary Veterinarian License available to out-of-state veterinarians who do not currently hold a Florida Veterinary License but wish to come to Florida to provide relief veterinary services.
Florida licensed veterinarians interested in offering volunteer services should contact the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Florida Vet Corp for information at 1-800-HELP-FLA (1-800-435-7352).
Food Industry Bulletins: DBPR has published Emergency Recovery Guidelines and Boil Water Notice Guidelines on our website, and DBPR's Division of Hotels and Restaurants is distributing the notices to licensed businesses in impacted areas.
DBPR Emergency Order 2022-01 extends the renewal deadline from September 30 or October 1, 2022, to October 31, 2022, for the multiple licenses.
Licenses renewed on or before October 31, 2022 shall be considered as timely renewals and will not be assessed any late fees.
DBPR Emergency Order 2022-01 also extends the deadline for the filing of monthly reports and returns by certain alcoholic beverage and tobacco license holders from October 10, 2022, to October 31, 2022. Additionally, the order suspends and tolls through October 31, 2022, all final orders reflecting final agency action and all time requirements and deadlines for filing responses outlined in agency orders.
DBPR Board Meeting cancellations and other updates can be found at http://myfloridalicense.com/emergency.
DBPR's Division of Drugs, Devices and Cosmetics is coordinating with wholesale distributors of prescription drugs and medical gases to provide information and support relating to exceptions for the emergency distribution of these critical supplies where needed.
Insurance
OIR is requiring insurers to report preliminary catastrophe claims for Hurricane Ian. To date, insurers have reported a total of $ 6,182,943,188 in estimated insured losses and a total of 543,601 claims. This aggregate information is compiled from claims data filed by insurers, it has not been audited or independently verified. Additional claim data and information can be found on OIR's Hurricane Ian information page here.
On October 17, 2022, the Department of Revenue issued Emergency Order #22-003, extending certain filing due dates for Florida businesses located in counties impacted by Hurricane Ian. The order extends September 2022 and October 2022 reporting periods for sales and use tax, reemployment tax and several other tax types to November 23, 2022 for the six counties in southwest Florida where Hurricane Ian made landfall: Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Hardee, Lee, and Sarasota. Those businesses affected by this order or impacted by the storm who have questions regarding the order may contact Taxpayer Services at (850) 488-6800 or by email at GTAHurricaneHelp@Floridarevenue.com
OIR issued Emergency Order 300997-22-EO in response to Hurricane Ian regarding the extension of grace periods, limitations on cancellations and nonrenewals, deemers and limitations on "use and file" filings. This Emergency Order is issued to protect the public health, safety and welfare of all Florida policyholders.
OIR instituted a data call for the purpose of collecting catastrophe claims data related to Hurricane Ian. OIR is requiring daily catastrophe claims reporting for Hurricane Ian starting Friday, September 30 to assist with determining the impact of Hurricane Ian on Florida's insurance industry. More information regarding catastrophe claims data and reporting is available here.
Florida Main Street Program
The Florida Department of State, Division of Historical Resources', Florida Main Street Program has been in contact with Florida Main Street communities before and after Hurricane Ian to mitigate damage to the communities and historic properties in these communities.
Florida Main Street has dispersed information to communities including recovery resources, volunteer assistance, Small Business Association Loan opening and disaster assistance information in disaster declaration areas.
Additionally, The Florida Main Street Program has paired up communities that were affected by Hurricane Ian with mentors who were successful in rehabilitation after Hurricane Michael to provide pragmatic experience about ways to move forward and recover after disaster.
Elections Update
At the request of the Supervisors of Elections in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties, and at the recommendation of Secretary of State Cord Byrd, the Governor signed Executive Order 22-234, which will help ensure adequate access to Florida's 2022 General Election ballot for the voters of Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties.
The Governor's Executive Order includes provisions authorizing the Supervisors of Elections in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties to:
Extend the number of days for early voting and designate additional early voting locations. The early voting period may begin as early as Monday, October 24, 2022, and can extend through Election Day, November 8, 2022.
Allow voters in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties to request by phone that their vote-by-mail (VBM) ballot be mailed to an address other than their address of record. Voters must still provide an appropriate form of identification in the same manner as absent uniform service and overseas voters.
Designate and provide notice of the locations for secure ballot intake stations and relocate and consolidate polling locations as necessary.
Increase the pool of eligible poll workers who may serve within Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties by making eligible any poll workers previously trained for the 2020 election cycle and thereafter and by encouraging state employees to serve as poll workers in these counties.
Governor DeSantis also directed all state agencies to render aid and assistance as needed by the Supervisors of Elections in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties. Secretary Byrd and the Department of State assessed the need for these provisions based on extensive outreach to Florida's Supervisors of Elections:
Secretary Byrd and the Division of Elections leadership conducted continuous outreach and assessed the needs and readiness of counties in or around Hurricane Ian's path, including: Charlotte, Citrus, Collier, DeSoto, Dixie, Flagler, Gilchrist, Hardee, Hernando, Highlands, Hillsborough, Lafayette, Lake, Lee, Levy, Manatee, Orange, Osceola, Pasco, Pinellas, Polk, Putnam, Sarasota, Seminole, St. Johns, Taylor, and Volusia counties. Secretary Byrd also personally visited the hardest hit areas, including Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Lee, Hardee, and Sarasota counties to meet with their Supervisors of Elections in-person.
Furthermore, Secretary Byrd participated in discussions with the Florida Supervisors of Elections (FSE). The FSE is a nonprofit association representing the Supervisors of Elections from all of Florida's 67 counties.
Lastly, since Hurricane Ian made landfall, numerous Supervisors of Elections have publicly addressed their readiness, and thankfully most have very publicly stated that Ian's impacts will not interfere with their duties. This is a testament to the resiliency of Florida's elections system.
Office Closures
State facilities closed can be found at dms.myflorida.com/buildingclosures and the Florida DMS Emergency Information Hotline at 888-336-7345.
Search and Rescue
There have been 2,500 rescues made to date.
More than 1,000 team members performed search and rescue.
DCF has created a First Responder Support Line (407-823-1657) that all first responders throughout the impacted areas can contact. This line combines current resources into a single point of contact that will connect first responders with mental health professionals.
The State Disaster Recovery Mental Health Coordinator created a survey to assess the need for mental health services for Hurricane Ian first responders.
The Florida National Guard has cleared 51.5 miles to date in the impacted area. Guardsmen continue to assist law enforcement with roving patrols, security, traffic control and curfew enforcement missions.
###
Load-Date: October 19, 2022



End of Document





Broken pipe has Hawaii military families under boil water advisory
UPI
October 19, 2022 Wednesday 5:52 PM EST

Copyright 2022 U.P.I. All Rights Reserved

Length: 380 words
Byline: SIMON DRUKER
Dateline: Oct. 19 
Body






A broken water main in Hawaii is behind a boil water advisory affecting around 93,000 people at Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, military authorities have confirmed.
Residents are also picking up potable drinking water, with repairs to the damaged 36-inch pipe expected to last at least another week.
The water main first broke on Friday, followed by smaller breaks in two separate areas in the Pearl City Peninsula area of Honolulu. A fourth break was detected Monday.
The break is affecting nearby Ford Island as well as Pearl Harbor, Hickam, Aliamanu Military Reservation, Red Hill and Camp Smith.
"Fixing a line of this size presents an engineering challenge and there hasn't been any easy fixes," U.S. Navy Capt. Mark Sohaney, commander of Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam wrote in a letter posted on Facebook.
Members from all military branches and their families are affected, as well as members of the public.
"All commanders were also asked to minimize manning and to only perform mission essential activities. These measures will reduce the stress on the remaining capacity of the potable water system," Sohaney wrote.
"A boil water advisory remains in effect. Water can continue to be used for personal hygiene, but all water used for consumption, cooking, brushing teeth, etc. should be boiled for at least one minute. The overall system remains low pressure, but stable."
This isn't the first time the same communities have had to deal with water issues.
Last November, 19,377 gallons of jet fuel and other contaminants from the Red Hill Bulk fuel storage facility leaked into the drinking water system, forcing thousands of families to evacuate their homes.
More than 93,000 military service members, family members and civilians relied on the government for safe drinking water.
At the end of August, four families filed a federal lawsuit against the U.S. Navy over the jet fuel leaks that contaminated Pearl Harbor water on Oahu, Hawaii, temporarily forcing them out of their homes.
The families filed the lawsuit in the U.S. District Court for the District of Hawaii, accusing the Navy of releasing the contaminants.
The lawsuit contends families suffered gastrointestinal disorders, neurological issues, burns, rashes, lesions, thyroid abnormalities, migraines and other maladies.
Load-Date: October 19, 2022



End of Document


JBPHH 36-INCH WATER MAIN REPAIRED
US Fed News
October 19, 2022 Wednesday 12:02 PM  EST

Copyright 2022 HT Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Length: 261 words
Body




JOINT BASE PEARL HARBOR, Oct. 19 -- Commander, U.S. Naval Forces Korea, issued the following news release:
Base leadership is optimistic these repairs are an important step towards lifting the boil water advisory as early as this weekend. Several steps need to be taken to restore the system to its designed capacity, including the slow introduction of water back into the system to restore pressure and system health. After pressure is restored, additional sampling for bacteria will be conducted to verify the safety of the water. Those test samples will be sent to a state approved third-party local laboratory in Hawaii. These results are expected back in one to two days. The boil water advisory will only be lifted when those test results are negative.
"I want to thank our contracted partners, Dawson, Hawaiian Dredging and Coffman Engineering, who worked hand-in-hand with my Public Works Department," said CAPT Mark Sohaney, Joint Base commander. "I would also like to thank the Board of Water Supply for their continued support and allowing the Navy to connect to their system."
While water pressure is restored, family housing residents and other users of the Joint Base water system may see fluctuations in water pressure, sediment and a slight smell of chlorine, as well as have air pockets in their water. Residents may also see workers opening up fire hydrants that will help to equalize water pressure throughout the system. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
Load-Date: October 21, 2022



End of Document


Navy: On schedule to fix Pearl Harbor water main in 1 week
Greenwire
October 19, 2022 Wednesday

Copyright 2022 Politico LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: TODAY'S STORIES; Vol. 10; No. 9
Length: 260 words
Body




By Associated Press The Navy said Tuesday it was still fixing an underground water pipe that ruptured last week and interrupted the supply of water to about 93,000 people at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii. The bursting of the 36-inch water main has also forced the Navy to postpone plans to remove 1 million gallons of fuel from three pipelines at the Red Hill Bulk Fuel Storage Facility, the tank farm that leaked petroleum into Pearl Harbor's tap water last year. 
Navy Capt. Mark Sohaney, the commander of Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, said Tuesday that crews were on schedule to finish fixing the broken water main in about one week. When the water main burst last Friday, officials had to divert water to the west side of the base. That increased pressure in smaller water lines there, leading to additional pipe breaks in Pearl City Peninsula and West Loch. These two smaller breaks have since been repaired. The Navy issued a boil-water advisory for affected areas last Friday, and gyms and child care centers have been closed. Sohaney told reporters he expects to reopen most of the base's 12 child care centers Wednesday. The water problems forced Joint Task Force Red Hill to delay plans it had for this week to drain fuel from three pipelines connecting the Red Hill Bulk Fuel Storage Facility to fuel points on the base. The Navy needs to remove fuel from these pipes to prepare for the eventual closure of the World War II storage tanks. It plans to finish draining 100 million gallons of fuel from the tanks by July 2024 and close the facility afterward.
Load-Date: November 16, 2022



End of Document


Navy: On schedule to fix Pearl Harbor water main in 1 week
Associated Press State & Local
October 19, 2022 Wednesday 2:39 AM GMT

Copyright 2022 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 261 words
Byline: AUDREY McAVOY, Associated Press
Dateline: HONOLULU 
Body




HONOLULU (AP) — The Navy said Tuesday it was still fixing an underground water pipe that ruptured last week and interrupted the supply of water to about 93,000 people at Pearl Harbor.
The bursting of the 36-inch (91-centimeter) water main has also forced the Navy to postpone plans to remove 1 gallons (3.79 million liters) of fuel from three pipelines at the Red Hill Bulk Fuel Storage Facility, the tank farm that leaked petroleum into Pearl Harbor's tap water last year.
Navy Capt. Mark Sohaney, the commander of Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, said Tuesday crews were on schedule to finish fixing the broken water main in about one week.
When the water main burst last Friday, officials had to divert water to the west side of the base. That increased pressure in smaller water lines there, leading to additional pipe breaks in Pearl City Peninsula and West Loch. These two smaller breaks have since been repaired.
The Navy issued a boil water advisory for affected areas last Friday, and gyms and child care centers have been closed.
Sohaney told reporters he expects to reopen most of the base's 12 child care centers on Wednesday.
The water problems forced Joint Task Force Red Hill to delay plans it had for this week to drain fuel from three pipelines connecting the Red Hill Bulk Fuel Storage Facility to fuel points on the base.
The Navy needs to remove fuel from these pipes to prepare for the eventual closure of the World War II storage tanks. It plans to finish draining 100 million gallons of fuel from the tanks by July 2024 and close the facility afterward.
Load-Date: October 18, 2022



End of Document


The massive 2021 infrastructure act aimed to fight climate change. Is it living up to Biden's pledge?
USA Today Online
October 19, 2022

Copyright 2022 Gannett Media Corp  All Rights Reserved
Section: CONSTRUCTION NEWS, CONSTRUCTION NEWS, CONSTRUCTION NEWS & US NEWS
Length: 2952 words
Byline: Kyle Bagenstose, USA TODAY
Body




When President Joe Biden signed the $1.2 trillion Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act last November – commonly known as the bipartisan infrastructure bill – he and other proponents noted it would be the largest investment in infrastructure in a generation.
But they also promised it would be something else: a historic effort to tackle climate change. Although it didn't devote hundreds of billions of dollars directly to the climate fight as the Inflation Reduction Act did this year, the administration said the infrastructure bill would help transition the nation to cleaner sources of energy while electrifying the transportation sector and preparing roads and bridges for a changing world.
“President Biden’s Bipartisan Infrastructure Deal passed by Congress will strengthen our nation’s resilience to extreme weather and climate change while reducing greenhouse gas emissions, expanding access to clean drinking water, building up a clean power grid, and more,” a statement from the White House asserted in November 2021.
INFRASTRUCTURE BILL: 'We're finally getting this done': Biden signs landmark infrastructure package in major win for domestic agenda
Promises were numerous:
 
•	Roads and bridges: $110 billion to “repair and rebuild our roads and bridges with a focus on climate change mitigation, resilience, equity, and safety." 
•	More public transit: $105 billion for public transit and rail, which would “eliminate the Amtrak maintenance backlog” and otherwise cut down greenhouse gas emissions from the transportation sector by electrifying public transit. 
•	Better grid: $65 billion for “the largest investment in clean energy transmission and the electric grid in American history.” 
•	Cleaner water: $15 billion to “replace all of the nation’s lead pipes and service lines” and about $35 billion more to further upgrade drinking and wastewater infrastructure. 
•	EV chargers: $7.5 billion to “build out the first-ever national network of EV chargers in the United States."
Link to Image
Experts say that as funding from the law begins to roll out, Americans will soon see upgrades like electric school buses, followed by a growing network of electric vehicle charging stations. But they also warn that funding from the bill probably won't result in dramatic changes in the way Americans and electricity move throughout the country, limiting the overall climate impact.
USA TODAY spoke to a variety of climate and transportation experts to look more closely at whether the bill's promises are meeting reality.
Bill likely won't lead to transportation transformation
Though experts said it's too early to fully judge the bill on its climate merits – spending will primarily be portioned out over five or 10 years – many agreed on two conclusions.
First, the bill is indeed historic in its commitment of money and focus on climate. Experts said that in most cases the Biden administration is working diligently to ensure a good rollout. Among other measures, the U.S. Department of Transportation is crafting a new regulation to pair about $27 billion in funding with an effort for states to track and lower greenhouse emissions from transportation.
MORE ON CLIMATE CHANGE: Humanity healed the ozone hole. Can we do the same for climate change?
MORE ON CLIMATE CHANGE: Elon Musk says 'population collapse' is a bigger threat than climate change. Is he right?
But others say that because of continued prioritization of roads and cars and a lack of accountability at the state level, they don't expect the bill to revolutionize the transportation or energy sectors, which together account for more than half of U.S. greenhouse gas emissions.
"Most Americans do not have access to transit or certainly not good transit," said Beth Osborne, director of the national nonprofit Transportation for America. “We have a lot of work to do."
Link to Image
Much of the past year was spent simply laying the groundwork for awarding the funding. Money will start to roll out this fall or early next year.
Experts say administration officials have moved swiftly to set funding stipulations that meet many climate and policy groups' wish lists. Most feel the administration is doing about all it can to ensure climate change remains a priority once money is awarded to states and cities, which will actually do the spending.
“There's still a lot to do, but they've made a lot of progress since the law was enacted,” said Deron Lovaas, a senior policy adviser with the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC), a Washington, D.C.-based nonprofit.
But experts warn the devil's in the details, and many won't be revealed until further down the line.
Mixed results from projects with early rollouts
Of projects that have had early rollouts, results are mixed.
On one end of the spectrum, cities and schools are clamoring for money for electric school buses, generating a buzz of excitement about a rapid transition in the years ahead.
Money to replace lead service lines sits on the other side of the ledger. Experts have noted that the allocated $15 billion doesn't nearly match the actual cost of replacing every lead drinking water pipe across the country.
With the first year of state-by-state funding for lead service line replacements already set in stone, local lawmakers in states like New Jersey are decrying a formula they say unfairly awards more money to some states.Because the formula was based on overall infrastructure needs instead of the number of actual lead service lines, an NRDC analysis found states like Ohio and New Jersey get only about $100 per lead pipe, while Hawaii receives $10,000.
Link to Image
“It is shocking that the reported plan for the distribution of these funds gives some states thousands of dollars per pipe ... while the most impacted states are left to bear almost the entire cost of replacement themselves,” New Jersey state senators Troy Singleton and Linda Greenstein wrote in a letter to the Environmental Protection Agency.
The EPA says it is working to fix its funding formula in the second year of the program, but the problem points to a wider truth, experts say: The bill's money is not going to fully address the nation's infrastructure and environmental challenges.
Car infrastructure gets boost from road and highway funding
Kevin DeGood, director of infrastructure policy at the nonprofit Center for American Progress, noted that the lion's share of the bill's new spending – $110 billion – is earmarked for traditional infrastructure like roads and bridges.
That, in itself, can be problematic. For much of the past century, America's spending on transportation has revolved around the automobile, with interstate highway systems feasting as public transportation systems like trains and subways starved. Because cars and trucks emit large quantities of carbon dioxide, that legacy has now made transportation the largest emitter of greenhouse gases of any sector in the U.S. economy.
“So many people are locked into driving, because that's the only thing we built for,” DeGood said.
The fact that the bill continues to spend heavily on roadways signals that the automobile still reigns supreme. Further complicating the matter, DeGood said, is that the $110 billion in additional road and bridge funding is largely distributed to 52 state Department of Transportation agencies, including those in Washington, D.C., and Puerto Rico.
Link to Image
Those agencies have some flexibility in how they use the money, including for public transportation. But DeGood says that historically such departments have focused on cars by expanding roadways and building new ones and that there is little to suggest this time will be different.
When state DOT administrators “wake up in the morning,” DeGood said, “they think in terms of congestion and road widening.”
The first year of boosted road and bridge funding has already rolled out the door, and oversight on how much is actually going to climate-friendly projects is difficult because of the slushiness of state budgets, DeGood said.
Groundwork starts on electric vehicle charging station network
Reliance on the automobile can be less problematic if cars and trucks on the road are running on electricity.
Max Baumhefner, a senior attorney with the NRDC who watches the electric vehicle space, said there's mostly good news on the effort to build out a promised nationwide network of charging stations.
ELECTRIC CARS: Rolls-Royce unveils its first electric car, begins 'all-electric' goal
CHARGING TIME: NASA says its space tech could cut electric car charging times to 5 minutes or less
Although he says it will be a year or two before Americans see chargers paid for by the bill physically installed, he adds that the U.S. Department of Transportation worked swiftly to launch a National Electric Vehicle Infrastructure program, which will divvy up the $5 billion set aside for electric vehicle charging stations.
Link to Image
Just three months after the bill passed, the program released guidelines for states to apply for the money. Baumhefner approves of the criteria, which he says emphasizes the installation of the latest generation of fast-charging stations located strategically along heavily traveled highways.
“Fast charging is getting a lot faster,” Baumhefner said. “We're seeing a move toward charging that gets you back on the road after a cup of coffee and a bathroom break, where before it was more like stopping for lunch.”
Another $2.5 billion is earmarked for a separate community grant program that Baumhefner predicts will mostly be used to build out local charging stations. The Inflation Reduction Act passed this summer offers further billions to complement charging station development. 
But Baumhefner warns of a downside: Estimates show the U.S. probably will need to spend at least $40 billion on public EV charging stations just to meet its 2030 climate goals. And that doesn't include what it will cost to charge medium- and heavy-duty vehicles like tractor trailers or hit even larger 2050 targets.
“The bottom line is that it's a historic investment, but it's not alone sufficient,” Baumhefner said.
Public transit and rail gets a smaller portion of funding
Osborne, with Transportation for America, says it's a similar story for public transportation and railways.
The bill allocated more money than ever for public transportation, which she says will largely address much-needed maintenance backlogs in cities and towns across the country. Although much of the money has yet to be used, Americans can expect to see lots of minor improvements in the years ahead: faster subways and trolleys as rail lines are repaired, older train cars and buses replaced with nicer new ones, and more frequent service.
Link to Image
Amtrak received a particularly big boost, a nearly ninefold increase in funding from the last major transportation bill in 2015.
And perhaps the most visible transformation to Americans will be school buses. The infrastructure bill devoted $5 billion to replacing gas-powered school buses nationwide with ones running on electricity or other zero-emission fuels. In September, the EPA announced it was nearly doubling the amount of first-year funding, from $500 to $965 million, after school districts bombarded it with applications.
The agency expects to release a list of awardees this month.
“We’re working across all 50 states to accelerate the transition to a future where clean, zero-emissions school buses are the American standard,” EPA Administrator Michael Regan said in a statement.
But Osborne says there are still a lot of question marks on public transportation.
A simple boost in funding isn't enough on its own, she says, noting that federal and state officials still need to build out programs to successfully use the money. Often, such efforts can get bogged down by politics and special interests.
In one particularly thorny example, Osborne says, Amtrak wants to upgrade passenger service along the Gulf Coast on railways owned by CSX, a private company. But she says CSX has largely rebuffed the efforts based on cost claims, and the matter is now before a federal review board. How aggressively the administration approaches the dispute could foretell how serious it is about public transit.
“There is a failure to regulate and manage the rail owners according to the law,” Osborne said. “The administration has to get that straight.”
Link to Image
And even if policies ultimately complement the funding, Osborne says, results are still mitigated by the fact that the car remains king. There's more money than ever for rail and public transit, but the same is true for roads and highways. With the latter still getting about 80% of the pie, Osborne has serious doubts on how far the needle will move in the effort to lower greenhouse gas emissions from the transportation sector.
“It's almost entirely status quo,” Osborne said. “If we really want to make a big difference on climate and equity ... we need to build tons and tons more public transit.”
Power grid still can't support climate change goals
Experts say the country also needs to build vast amounts of new high-power transmission lines to support the shift to renewables and cut emissions from the energy sector, the second-largest emitter of greenhouse gases after transportation.
Rob Gramlich, president of power sector consulting firm Grid Strategies LLC, says such lines are essential to ensuring wind, solar and other green energy sources can travel vast distances to population centers. Demand for renewable energy generation is growing, as it is for electric cars and devices. But transmission lines linking the two are falling far behind.
“What that tells you is this going to be the big issue of the next few years,” Gramlich said.
Link to Image
On paper, the infrastructure bill devoted $81 billion to the energy grid and power sector, the second-biggest pot of money after roads and bridges. In promoting the bill, the White House promised “thousands of miles of new, resilient transmission lines to facilitate the expansion of renewable energy.”
But, Gramlich said, the bill provided very little funding for the actual construction of such transmission lines. Most of the power and grid money made available under the law is broken into a diverse constellation of small programs, from carbon capture infrastructure to blackout prevention to nuclear energy.
A program to fund high-voltage power lines, the Transmission Facilitation Program, received just $2.5 billion and operates on a loan basis.
“That's about one month's worth of transmission spending in the country," Gramlich said. “It's marginally helpful but a far cry from anything transformative.”
More funding for water, but big challenges remain
In addition to climate change, the infrastructure bill promised to address another pressing human and environmental priority: water.
The American Society of Civil Engineers gives U.S. wastewater infrastructure a D-plus, with drinking water fairing only slightly better at a C-plus. A recent systemwide collapse that put more than 150,000 residents of Jackson, Mississippi, under a boil-water advisory highlighted the harm that can come from neglect.
The infrastructure bill promised to address such problems. It pumped about $50 billion into the water sector, about a fivefold increase over prior funding levels.
That's welcome news in cities such as El Paso, Texas, where a fresh infusion of $20 million from the bill will help pay for an advanced water recycling facility set to begin construction next year, bringing a sustainable water source to the drought-stricken city.
“This facility is the game changer in the nation’s efforts to secure safe and reliable water supply for ratepayers throughout the West and nationwide,” Pat Sinicropi, executive director of the trade group WateReuse Association, told the El Paso Times.
Link to Image
More: 'An outstanding model': El Paso advanced water purification facility gets federal funding
But advocates say that while funding in the bill is transformative for some such cities, the money will fall short across the entire country.
“I do wish people would stop calling it a once-in-a-generation bill,” said Becky Hammer, deputy director of federal water policy at NRDC. “Because we need more investment this generation.”
Erik Olson, a senior strategist at NRDC, said that spread over five years, new money in the bill for water infrastructure comes out to about $10 billion annually. That's a significant boost over regular funding levels, which average less than $3 billion. But with some estimates calling for more than $1 trillion to fully address the nation's water problems, that means it could still take centuries to clear a national backlog unless Congress continues to significantly increase funding.
As with money for transportation, the bill's water funding also flows through state agencies, which are subject to their own whims and often award money to politically connected and wealthy communities. Olson points to reporting around Jackson, which indicates state officials historically steered money away from the majority-Black city, to highlight the problem.
More: Funds to aid Jackson's water system held up as Mississippi Governor Tate Reeves rose
“Unless EPA and states can figure out a way around ... it's going to remain challenging to make sure this money goes to communities that need it most,” Olson said.
Kyle Bagenstose covers climate change, chemicals, water and other environmental topics for USA TODAY. He can be reached at  kbagenstose@gannett.co m or on Twitter @kylebagenstose.
Contributing: Martha Pskowski, El Paso Times 
This article originally appeared on USA TODAY: The massive 2021 infrastructure act aimed to fight climate change. Is it living up to Biden's pledge?
Load-Date: October 28, 2022



End of Document


Animal rescue, flesh-eating bacteria, child marriage: News from around our 50 states
USA Today Online
October 19, 2022

Copyright 2022 Gannett Media Corp  All Rights Reserved
Section: RALEIGH-DURHAM NEWS, RALEIGH-DURHAM NEWS, RALEIGH-DURHAM NEWS, RALEIGH-DURHAM NEWS & US NEWS
Length: 9533 words
Byline: From USA TODAY Network and wire reports
Body




Alabama
Birmingham: A judicial panel convicted a judge of violating ethics rules by failing to return to work and serve without pay following her conviction in an earlier ethics case, court documents show. Jefferson County Circuit Judge Tracie Todd was given a 120-day suspension without pay in an order filed Monday following a trial that lasted five days over three months before the Alabama Court of the Judiciary. Todd was convicted last year of violating orders of an appellate court and, as punishment, ordered to work for 90 days without pay beginning last Dec. 6, news outlets reported. Rather than reporting for duty at the courthouse in Birmingham, Todd remained for most of the period in Chicago, where her husband and children live, evidence showed. 
Todd, who testified in her own defense, claimed she worked remotely while in Chicago and couldn’t return to Alabama because of illness and COVID-19 quarantines that restricted her from travel. The court could have permanently removed Todd, and one of her lawyers, Edward J. Ungvarsky, said the decision to only suspend her for four months represented a vindication. “Judges, lawyers, and court personnel consistently testified that Judge Todd displays the greatest of integrity, honesty, and compassion,” Ungvarsky said. The Court of the Judiciary convicted Todd in December 2021 of violating judicial ethics by disregarding decisions by higher courts and inserting her own opinions into rulings, including one that declared Alabama’s death penalty statute was unconstitutional. The Alabama Court of Criminal Appeals and the Alabama Supreme Court overturned the decision.
Alaska
Anchorage: The Anchorage Assembly leadership is condemning remarks made by a member of the public during last week’s Assembly meeting, Alaska Public Media reports. When testifying on an ordinance about designating a former hotel as a temporary emergency shelter, a man made racist and derogatory comments about Alaska Native people, according to the news outlet. East Anchorage Assembly member Forrest Dunbar swiftly rebuked the comments. In a statement Tuesday, Assembly chair Suzanne LaFrance and vice-chair Chris Constant said they wanted to “speak out against the racist and offensive statements made by the member of the public. Unfortunately, this is not the first time racist views have been expressed in the Assembly Chambers.”
Arizona
Tucson: A man convicted last month in the first of two murder cases is seeking a new trial, according to authorities. Christopher Clements was convicted Sept. 30 of first-degree murder and kidnapping in the death of 13-year-old Maribel Gonzalez. He was scheduled to be sentenced Wednesday in Pima County Superior Court, but the date has been moved to Nov. 14. Court officials also said Clements’ attorneys have filed a motion for a new trial and a motion for judgment of acquittal not withstanding the verdict. A Nov. 7 hearing is set for both motions. A judge also will hear testimony Nov. 14 for a possible change of venue for Clements’ other murder trial, scheduled for Feb. 2 involving the death of 6-year-old Isabel Celis. Clements, a 40-year-old convicted sex offender with a long criminal record, is facing life in prison when he’s sentenced in the Gonzalez case. Clements was arrested in 2018 and indicted on 22 felony counts including two counts each of first-degree murder and kidnapping in the girls’ deaths.
Arkansas
Fort Smith: Fentanyl, a deadly synthetic opioid that is often mixed with illegal drugs such as methamphetamine or heroin, is continuing to cause more overdoses and deaths in Fort Smith and the state. Fort Smith emergency responders have saved the lives of 66 people who overdosed on fentanyl this year with the life-saving Narcan drug that can counter the deadly effects of fentanyl and opiates. Fort Smith police report that paramedics, firefighters and others have given 194 doses of Narcan that could have resulted in deadly overdoses. Of those lives that have have been saved, 66 people were confirmed to have fentanyl in their system with an additional 31 people overdosing on unconfirmed substances and pills possibly with fentanyl.
California
San Diego: A motorcyclist and Navy veteran who lost a leg in a 2019 chain-reaction crash started by a Navy sailor driving a military van near San Diego has won a $10.8 million settlement against the United States. Attorneys for the motorcyclist, Peter Arthur, said the settlement is one of the largest against the federal government in the San Diego area for a suit involving a vehicle collision, the San Diego Union Tribune reported. Arthur, a 49-year-old who served 20 years in the U.S. Navy, underwent multiple surgeries following the Sept. 13, 2019, crash. Arthur was thrown from his motorcycle, causing the femur, tibia and fibula in his right leg to shatter, according to his civil lawsuit. Doctors eventually had to amputate the leg above the knee. Navy sailor Michael Stanley Reynolds was driving a large passenger van on Interstate 5 when he “suddenly and without warning” swerved into the next lane to his left, causing several vehicles to crash, according to the lawsuit. Reynolds did not face criminal charges in connection with the crash. A Navy spokesperson did not respond to a request for comment by the Union-Tribune. Arthur’s civil lawsuit against the federal government alleges his injuries were “permanent, disfiguring, and disabling” and “will require extensive future medical care, life care, and vocational rehabilitation.”
Colorado
Fort Collins: Colorado State University’s College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences recently announced a $278  million upgrade and expansionof its current vet school facilities on the university’s south campus. The new veterinary health complex, which is scheduled to break ground in early 2023 and be completed in 2028, will include an expansion of more than 300,000 square feet. The complex will have a veterinary education center and primary care clinic, and there will be renovations or expansions of current facilities, including a livestock teaching hospital and an animal specialty hospital. The school’s current teaching hospital off of Drake Road and College Avenue will be remodeled to become the animal specialty hospital. All work will be done in phases, so some elements will be completed prior to 2028. “Our college ranks among the world’s top institutions in veterinary and biomedical education and research,” said Sue VandeWoude, dean of the college, in the university’s release. “Our expansion plan for the south campus … will help us continue our tradition of excellence in the academic mission of teaching; the assessment of novel methods for training clinical students; and our research and service to the community.” With the new buildings come curricula changes, too. The new facilities will give CSU what it needs to implement a new curriculum focused on educating “day one-ready” veterinarians using medical training along with training in “problem-solving, conflict resolution, decision-making and mental, physical and financial wellbeing,” according to a release from the university.
Connecticut
Waterbury: Less than a week after two police officers were killed in an ambush, U.S. Rep. Jahana Hayes called for a national ban on assault weapons, while her Republican challenger, George Logan, stressed that more needs to be done to support law enforcement. The two are locked in a closely watched race for the state’s 5th Congressional District that has attracted more than $5 million in outside money. Appearing in their first televised debate, the pair was asked about a shooting that left two officers dead in Bristol, about 20 minutes away from where the debate was held. Hayes said officers like her husband, a 25-year-veteran of the Waterbury Police Department, can be outgunned. Noting that the state already has an assault weapons ban, Logan criticized Hayes for voting in favor of what he called an “anti-police bill.” He was referring to the George Floyd Justice in Policing Act of 2021, which banned chokeholds and “qualified immunity” for law enforcement while creating national standards for policing in a bid to bolster accountability. The bill was later blocked in the Senate.
Delaware
New Castle: A state trooper indicted last year for a fraudulent traffic warning scheme pleaded guilty to falsifying business records and official misconduct in New Castle County Superior Court on Monday, the Delaware Department of Justice said. Cpl. Edwin Ramirez, who was stationed at Troop 9 before his suspension in May 2021, was sentenced to a year of probation and 33 hours of community service – one hour for every false e-warning he filed. He also had to surrender his Council on Police Training certifications. Delaware Attorney General Kathy Jennings called Ramirez’s traffic warning scheme an “abuse of power” and said it “victimized innocent motorists,” some of whom did not even know they had received an e-warning. Others weren’t even driving when the fraudulent traffic stop supposedly occurred. Ramirez was officially sentenced to two concurrent yearlong prison sentences. It was suspended for a year of probation. Delaware State Police Superintendent Colonel Melissa Zebley noted in a written statement that Ramirez is no longer employed by the statewide police department.
District of Columbia
Washington: Metro Transit Police investigators are looking into an incident captured on video in which a woman was attacked and thrown off a bus, WUSA-TV reports. The woman said she was on the bus, which was headed to Deanwood on Monday afternoon, with her two children when a group of kids got on the bus and started cursing and acting rowdy, according to the news outlet. Things escalated and eventually turned physical when the woman asked the kids to stop cursing, according to the person who filmed the footage. At least three people can be seen grabbing the woman and pushing her out the door when the bus came to a stop, the news outlet reports.
Florida
Fort Myers: The state has seen an increase in cases of flesh-eating bacteria this year driven largely by a surge in the county hit hardest by Hurricane Ian. The state Department of Health reports that as of Friday there have been 65 cases of vibrio vulnificus infections and 11 deaths in Florida this year. That compares with 34 cases and 10 deaths reported during all of 2021. In Lee County, where Ian stormed ashore last month, the health department reports 29 cases this year and four deaths. Health officials didn’t give a breakdown of how many of the cases were before or after Ian struck. Lee County health officials earlier this month warned people that the post-hurricane environment – including warm, standing water – could pose a danger from the potentially deadly bacteria. “Flood waters and standing waters following a hurricane pose many risks, including infectious diseases such as vibrio vulnificus,” the county health department said in a news release Oct. 3 that urged the public to take precautions. The advisory said that people with open wounds, cuts, or scratches can be exposed to the bacteria through contact with sea water or brackish water. People with open wounds should avoid such water and seek medical care immediately if an infection is apparent.
Georgia
Atlanta: Two former jail detainees testified that deputies of a sheriff charged with violating their civil rights kept them in restraint chairs for hours, causing them to urinate on themselves while they were bound. Clayton County Sheriff Victor Hill is standing trial on federal charges that he violated the rights of seven detainees. Prosecutors say their placement in restraint chairs was unnecessary, was improperly used as punishment and caused pain and bodily injury. Hill is widely known as one of metro Atlanta’s most flamboyant lawmen. He calls himself “The Crime Fighter” and uses Batman imagery to promote himself on social media and in campaign ads. This is his second trial on criminal charges. Clayton County voters reelected Hill in 2012 while he was under indictment the first time, accused of using his office for personal gain. He beat those charges. Hill has pleaded not guilty to the civil rights charges, which his attorneys say are politically motivated. Drew Findling, one of Hill’s lawyers, cross-examined both men Tuesday about what he said where inconsistencies between their trial testimony and what they had previously told investigators.
Hawaii
Pearl Harbor: The Navy said Tuesday it was still fixing an underground water pipe that ruptured last week and interrupted the supply of water to about 93,000 people at Pearl Harbor. The bursting of the 36-inch water main has also forced the Navy to postpone plans to remove 1 gallon of fuel from three pipelines at the Red Hill Bulk Fuel Storage Facility, the tank farm that leaked petroleum into Pearl Harbor’s tap water last year. Navy Capt. Mark Sohaney, the commander of Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, said crews were on schedule to finish fixing the broken water main in about one week. When the water main burst last Friday, officials had to divert water to the west side of the base. That increased pressure in smaller water lines there, leading to additional pipe breaks in Pearl City Peninsula and West Loch. These two smaller breaks have since been repaired. The Navy issued a boil water advisory for affected areas last Friday, and gyms and child care centers have been closed.
Idaho
Boise: A legal loophole in the state that allows parents of teens to nullify child custody agreements by arranging child marriages will remain in effect, under a ruling from the state Supreme Court on Tuesday. In a split decision, the high court declined to decide whether Idaho’s child marriage law – which allows 16- and 17-year-olds to marry if one parent agrees to the union – is unconstitutional. Instead, the justices said that once a child is emancipated by marriage, the family court loses jurisdiction over custody matters. The case arose from a custody battle between a Boise woman and her ex-husband, who planned to move to Florida and wanted to take their 16-year-old daughter along. The ex-husband was accused of setting up a “sham marriage” between his daughter and another teen as a way to end the custody fight.
Illinois
Chicago: Democrat Gov. JB Pritzker and Republican challenger Darren Bailey traded barbs at the final gubernatorial debate Tuesday. The debate held at the WGN-TV studios featured many of the same topics as the prior debate at Illinois State University including crime, abortion and the SAFE-T Act. However, new wrinkles were added in the hourlong back and forth such as school curriculum and the possibility of a new stadium for the Chicago Bears. While questions primarily focused on the issues, both candidates landed punches with Pritzker calling Bailey a “threat to democracy” and Bailey labeling Chicago “Pritzkerville” because of crime in the city. It was the last scheduled televised debate between the candidates and possibly the last time they shared venues, giving Bailey perhaps his last chance to cut into Pritzker’s lead in the polls. Recent polling conducted by The Chicago Sun-Times/WBEZ found the Democrat with 49% of voters supporting him compared to 34% for Bailey.
Indiana
Indianapolis: A man has been convicted of reckless homicide in the fatal 2020 shooting of a young Black man during unrest sparked by outrage over George Floyd’s killing by Minneapolis police. Prosecutors had charged Tyler Newby, 32, with murder, but after a one-day bench trial a Marion County judge found Newby, who is white, guilty Monday of the lesser crime of reckless homicide in Dorian Murrell’s death. His sentencing was set for Nov. 10. Murrell, 18, died from a single gunshot wound to the heart after being shot in downtown Indianapolis on May 31, 2020, during violence that followed protests over the death of Floyd, a Black man. Newby’s first trial in Murrell’s killing ended in a mistrial last year after jurors failed to reach a unanimous verdict following several hours of deliberation. Newby turned himself in shortly after the shooting. He claimed self defense, saying the shooting took place after he was approached by a group of people and shoved to the ground. Newby said he saw someone standing over him and fired. Prosecutors argued that being shoved to the ground wasn’t justification to take someone’s life. Three people who had been with Murrell when he was shot have been charged in connection with the robbery and killing of Chris Beaty, a businessman and a former Indiana University football player. Beaty, 38, was fatally shot in downtown Indianapolis hours before Murrell was slain.
Iowa
Des Moines: Gov. Kim Reynolds now has the support of a majority of likely Iowa voters – and a sizable lead over her competitors with just over three weeks until Election Day. A Des Moines Register/Mediacom Iowa Poll finds Reynolds at 52% support, holding a 17-percentage point advantage over Democrat Deidre DeJear, who has 35%. Libertarian Rick Stewart trails at 4%. Another 4% of likely voters say they are not sure for whom they would vote, 3% say they would vote for “someone else,” and 1% say they would not vote. Reynolds is holding her large lead even as more Iowans solidify their support behind one of the two major-party candidates. Reynolds also enjoyed a 17-point margin in the previous Iowa Poll in July, even though her overall support was lower in that poll, at 48%, versus 31% for DeJear. Fewer Iowans now say they’re undecided or would vote for “someone else,” but support for both Reynolds and DeJear increased equally – by 4 percentage points – since the July poll. And Reynolds maintains a significant advantage over DeJear in name recognition: Among all Iowans, more than half, 51%, still don’t know enough about DeJear to form an opinion about her, versus only 3% for Reynolds, the poll found. Reynolds also enjoys her highest approval rating since fall of 2021, at 53%.
Kansas
Lawrence: The University of Kansas has begun the process of returning Native American remains and other sacred objects that were recently discovered in its museum collections, the university said. University officials said in a statement posted online that “culturally unidentified individual remains,” funeral objects and other sacred objects were found in Spooner Hall and Lippincott Hall Annex on the Lawrence campus. The university is verifying its inventory of Indigenous artifacts it holds across campus. A spokesperson did not respond Tuesday to questions about the number of artifacts, specifically how and when they were found, or to which tribes they belong. The announcement comes 32 years after the passage of the federal Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act, which sets out criteria for tribal nations to reclaim human remains and other objects related to burials. Kansas Chancellor Douglas Girod initially announced the discovery in a message to the campus Sept. 20. The university had begun efforts to repatriate some items in the past, but the process was not completed, he said. The university said its repatriation efforts will include forming an advisory committee, consulting with tribal nations, auditing all university collections, securing space for the Indigenous Studies Program, supporting gathering opportunities for the university’s Native American community, and instituting repatriation policies and procedures. “The intent in sharing this announcement is to publicly apologize to Native communities and peoples, past, present, and future, and to apologize to the tribal nations across North America,” the university’s statement said.
Kentucky
Burkesville: The state’s 26th Trail Town has been certified, and it is in Cumberland County, the Department of Parks said. “Trail Towns are ideal destinations for outdoor recreation lovers,” Parks Commissioner Russ Meyer said in a news release Tuesday. “The program helps drive local and state economies and is an ever-increasing component of the nation’s economic impact. It also brings about more healthy activities and vibrant communities and parks.” The program is designed to provide a strategic plan that communities can use to capitalize on travel opportunities, the agency said. It also works to create healthy physical activities with access to trails and recreational areas. The Burkesville Trail Town offerings feature the Cumberland River and the connection to the downtown area. The river offers boating, fishing, and paddling. Burkesville is also home to Dale Hollow Lake State Resort Park.
Louisiana
New Orleans: An outage involving a Coast Guard marine warning system and “data gaps” in radar systems were factors in last year’s deadly capsize of an oil industry vessel during severe storms off of Louisiana’s coast, the National Transportation Safety Board said in a report issued Tuesday. Thirteen of the 19 people aboard the Seacor Power died after the offshore vessel capsized in the Gulf after leaving Port Fourchon. Known as a lift boat, the vessel had three legs that could be lowered to the sea floor, converting the ship to an offshore platform for servicing oil and gas facilities. It had been chartered by Talos Energy LLC for work on a Gulf platform when it was hit by high winds in rough seas and capsized on April 13, 2021. An NTSB preliminary report had said the Seacor Power had begun to lower its stabilizing legs and was trying to turn to face heavy winds when it flipped in the Gulf of Mexico. Six people were rescued. The NTSB said in Tuesday’s report that the captain of the Seacor Power made a “reasonable” decision to get underway the day of the disaster. But he didn’t have sufficient weather information from the lift boat company. “Additionally, due to a Coast Guard broadcasting station outage, the SEACOR Power crew did not receive a National Weather Service Special Marine Warning notifying mariners of a severe thunderstorm that was approaching,” the report said.
Maine
Machias: A longtime law enforcement officer and former candidate for sheriff in Washington County has been sentenced to four years in prison for drug- and gun-related charges. The case against Jeffrey Bishop, 55, unfolded with his arrest for providing opioid pills to a teenage girl last year in a high school parking lot. Prosecutors said the drugs were meant for the girl’s mother. He told the judge Monday that he was “very humble” and a “very broken man” but said he wasn’t fully satisfied with the plea agreement, the Bangor Daily News reported. He also said he was “baffled” that his police background was considered an aggravating factor when it came to his sentencing. He was arrested less than a week after he retired from the Calais Police Department last year. In his resignation letter, Bishop said he “decided to go out on top,” after a long career in law enforcement.
Maryland
Hagerstown: Gov. Larry Hogan and other political and business leaders Tuesday toured the Hitachi Rail factory being built in Washington County. “The job creation potential and associated economic benefits are an absolute game-changer for this region and for the entire state,” the Republican governor said in remarks before the tour. “This project is further proof that the Hagerstown region is a major logistical center for transportation with unparalleled connections to the northeastern United States.” Hitachi also unveiled the final design of the $70 million factory, which will employ about 460 people and help sustain a total of 1,300 jobs in the region. The 307,000-square-foot facility is being build at the west end of Halfway Boulevard, which the county plans to extend to Greencastle Pike (Md. 63). The 41-acre site also will include an 800-foot test track. Hogan called it a “transformative project.” Construction is slated to be finished in the first quarter of 2024.
Massachusetts
Salem: A Hindu rights activist is calling on a museum to stop selling children’s plush toys representing three Hindu deities. Toys depicting Lord Krishna, Lord Ganesh and Lord Hanuman were available on the Peabody Essex Museum’s online shop last week but had been removed by Tuesday, Rajan Zed, president of the Universal Society of Hinduism, said in a statement. The deities are “greatly revered in Hinduism and were meant to be worshipped in temples or home shrines and not to be thrown around loosely on the floor, bathrooms, cars, etc.” Zed said. He also called for a formal apology from the museum. The Peabody Essex Museum halted sales of the toys while it reviewed the complaint, spokesperson Whitney Van Dyke said in an email. “These items will be back on sale shortly,” she said. The museum pointed out that the toys are widely available and are manufactured by New Jersey-based Modi Toys, founded by an Indian American family. They are intended to spark curiosity in Hindu culture and heritage, company co-founder Avani Modi Sarkar said in a statement.
Michigan
Mount Pleasant: A man who got out of his car after striking a deer was killed by another vehicle, authorities said. The 33-year-old Shepherd man was hit Monday when the driver of the second car swerved to avoid a crash on U.S. 127, near Mount Pleasant, investigators said. Conditions were dark and misty. The lights on Joshua Davis’ Ford Focus “had been disabled from the deer accident and were not working,” the Isabella County sheriff’s office said. The driver of the other vehicle, a 77-year-old woman from Lansing, was taken to an emergency room for an evaluation, the sheriff’s office said.
Minnesota
Bloomington: The Mall of America is testing metal detectors at one entrance following two incidents of gunfire and an armed robbery within the last year. Mall spokeswoman Laura Utecht said Tuesday the trial is taking place over the next month at the mall’s north doors, although that could change as testing continues. She declined to say what shoppers should avoid trying to carry through the metal detectors, the Star Tribune reported. “With Mall of America being such a unique property, it is important to thoroughly evaluate this technology onsite to ensure its accuracy, effectiveness and efficiency,” Utecht said in a statement, adding that the mall is testing a variety of security options. The Mall of America bans guns, according to its website, but the shopping center has never had metal detectors or searched bags. The mall, which opened in 1992, is the largest in the U.S. and is a tourist destination and community gathering spot. Two gun incidents took place in August. In one, a man robbed two stores and was apprehended with a loaded rifle. About three weeks earlier, a man fired shots in the midst of a fight among four other people. There were no injuries in either case. A shooting last New Year’s Eve left two people wounded following a dispute on the mall’s third floor.
Mississippi
Jackson: An employee of a wastewater hauling company pleaded guilty in federal court Tuesday for his part in illegally discharging industrial waste into the capital city’s sewer system. William Roberts, an employee of Partridge-Sibley Industrial Services, admitted to supervising the improper disposal of industrial waste at a commercial entity in Jackson. As a result of Roberts’s negligence, the waste was trucked and hauled to a facility that was not a legal discharge point designated to receive the waste, federal prosecutors said. “The defendant’s negligent conduct contributed to the discharge of millions of gallons of untreated industrial waste into the Jackson water system,” said Chuck Carfagno, a special agent for the Environmental Protection Agency’s criminal investigations division. Jackson’s water and sewer system has been beset by troubles dating back years. The water system was recently engulfed in a crisis that forced people in the city of 150,000 to go days without running water in late August and early September. An attorney for Roberts did not immediately respond to a request for comment. He will be sentenced on December 14, 2022.
Missouri
Kansas City: Six students and two adults were taken to a hospital for evaluation after a carbon monoxide leak was detected Wednesday at an elementary school, officials said. The eight people taken to hospitals from Longfellow Elementary School suffered nausea and dizziness but none suffered life-threatening issues, Assistant Fire Chief Jimmy Walker said. Emergency responders went to the school after several students reporting feeling ill. Firefighters found “extremely high” levels of the lethal gas inside the building, Walker said. The level of carbon monoxide reached 2,000 parts per million, which was the maximum for monitors used by firefighters at the scene, Walker said. The cause of the leak is under investigation. Firefighters were ventilating the building but it was unclear when students could return to Longfellow. School district spokesperson Elle Moxley said the district had contractors check its heating systems last week, including at Longfellow, in anticipation of colder weather. No problems were detected, she said. Moxley said every child was checked and the district will work with the fire department before determining where Longfellow students will attend school this week.
Montana
Great Falls: A suspect who is accused of leading law enforcement on a vehicle chase through two counties on Monday has been charged with five felonies in Cascade County District Court. He is being held on a $500,000 bond. Santana Ledeau is charged with two counts of robbery, two counts of assault on a peace officer and one count of criminal endangerment. Cascade County Attorney Josh Racki said on Monday that Ledeau will likely face more charges as the investigation continues. That investigation, Cascade County Sheriff Jesse Slaughter said, will be conducted by the Montana Department of Justice’s Division of Criminal Investigation due to the many agencies involved.
Nebraska
Lincoln: Officials say improperly discarded cigarettes led to a fire in a home’s garage and caused $75,000 worth of damage, the Lincoln Journal Star reports. Lincoln Fire and Rescue Capt. Nancy Crist said the fire started after the resident emptied an ashtray into a garbage can. The blaze was contained to the garage and no one was injured, according to the news outlet.
Nevada
Reno: Republican Secretary of State candidate Jim Marchant is the only statewide candidate who has yet to file his campaign finance report, having missed Monday’s deadline. A central duty of the secretary of state’s office is administering elections, handling campaign finance reports and enforcing reporting deadlines for contribution and expenditure reports. The secretary of state also registers corporations and limited liability companies and represents the third highest ranking state official behind the governor and lieutenant governor. Marchant’s campaign did not immediately respond to an email request for comment Tuesday. The secretary of state’s office declined to comment. Campaign reporting deadlines normally fall on the 15th of the month for April, July, October and January. But since it fell on a Saturday this month, the deadline was moved to Monday at 5 p.m. Marchant had not filed by late afternoon Tuesday. If the report is filed one to seven days late, the candidate must pay a $25 daily fee. For eight to 15 days late, the penalty is $50 a day. And if the report is filed more than 15 days late, it is $100 a day the up to a maximum of $10,000. Marchant is among the America First Secretary of State Coalition candidates who deny the legitimacy of the 2020 election and vow to scrap early voting and vote-counting tabulators.
New Hampshire
Londonderry: The publisher of a weekly newspaper has waived her arraignment, pleading not guilty to charges that she published advertisements for local races without properly marking them as political advertising, the state attorney general’s office said. The six misdemeanor charges allege that Debra Paul, publisher of The Londonderry Times, failed to identify the ads with “appropriate language” indicating that they were ads and saying who paid for them as required by state law, the attorney general’s office said in August after reviewing cases that go back to 2019. Paul, who’s also a member of the town council in Londonderry, said in a statement at the time, “This is clearly a case of a small business needing to defend itself against overreaching government.” A police affidavit said altogether, nearly 60 violations in the Times and a related publication were counted between 2020 and this year. Paul, who along with her husband are the only two employees at the paper, said she originally believed the state’s complaint involved advertising rates, the affidavit said. Her attorney did not return a message seeking comment.
New Jersey
Madison: A former federal prosecutor-turned-producer and a media production company who used Drew University as their backdrop to film a movie about a prestigious college littered with hazing and prejudice is being sued by the school, who claims they filmed and dashed without paying their bill. Executive producer Traci Bransford and her production company Meadowcrest Films and Think Global Media, a company with studios across the nation, used the Morris County private school earlier this year to film “The Choices We Make.” But when it was time to remit payment of over $130,000, Bransford apparently had plenty of excuses why the money was being delayed, according to the lawsuit filed in state Superior Court in Morris County earlier this month. The university names Think Global Media owner Nathan Scinto in the suit due to his partnership with Bransford, but Scinto’s attorney Richard Roth said Tuesday it was “aggressive lawyering” and that there is “absolutely no basis” to go after his client or his company. The facilities and services agreement, which Roth said he obtained, was with Meadowcrest Films. Roth said he plans to file a motion to remove his client from the suit if the university’s attorney does not agree to remove him prior. He also noted that he does not believe there is jurisdiction in New Jersey since his client’s company is not connected to the state. A number listed for Bransford was disconnected and there was no response to an email request for comment. No attorney is listed for her.
New Mexico
Winston: Environmentalists are pushing the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to do more to protect Mexican gray wolves after one of the endangered predators was found dead in southwestern New Mexico. The Western Watersheds Project is among the groups that have been critical of the agency’s management of wolves in New Mexico and Arizona, saying illegal killings continue to hamper the population. However, the Fish and Wildlife Service says there have been fewer wolves found dead this year than in previous years. The agency also pointed to a revised recovery plan for the wolf that was released in early October. The agency was under a court order to revamp the plan to address the threat of human-caused mortality as one of the ways to increase survivability for wolves in the wild. Federal officials said they could not provide any details about the circumstances of the latest death since it was an ongoing investigation. It’s rare that such investigations are ever closed. Environmentalists described the male wolf recently found dead near Winston as one of the most genetically-valuable Mexican wolves in the wild. It had been released in 2018 after being born in captivity and then cross-fostered into a wild wolf den as part of an effort to increase genetic diversity.
New York
Miller Place: Authorities rescued nearly 300 rabbits, birds and other animals from a filthy home and charged a self-help book author with cruel confinement of animals, prosecutors announced. “Operation Open Cage” started Oct. 1 when investigators were contacted by animal control officers who reported a hoarding situation in the hamlet of Miller Place on Long Island, the Suffolk County district attorney’s office said. Officers wearing hazardous material suits found a total of 118 rabbits, 150 birds, 15 cats, seven tortoises, three snakes and several mice living among filth, many surrounded by their own feces and urine and covered with cockroaches, the district attorney said. The owner of the home, Karin Keyes, 51, was charged with multiple counts of cruel confinement of animals. She’s a social worker and the author of a self-published book titled “Journey Into Awareness: Reclaiming Your Life.” Information on Keyes’ attorney wasn’t available. A phone message was left at a number listed for her. Teams from the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals helped the district attorney’s Biological, Environmental and Animal Safety Team and local officers in removing and transporting the animals to animal welfare organizations around New York for medical care.
North Carolina
Raleigh: Democratic legislators pleaded with the General Assembly’s Republican majority on Tuesday to consider gun safety and mental health measures, citing last week’s shootings in Raleigh that left five people dead. Democratic lawmakers, one a resident of the east Raleigh subdivision where the shooting rampage began last Thursday, said the public expects elected officials to work together to pass laws designed to make them safer. “This is an issue that transcends party. It’s an issue about our safety, the safety of our children, the safety of our state,” Senate Minority Leader Dan Blue said at a news conference. Blue has lived in the Hedingham community where the shootings occurred for over 30 years “and never felt that I would be unsafe in the community where we raised our kids until last week.” Previous Democratic requests for Republicans to permit debate and votes on gun-control measures and others to keep weapons out of the hands of people at extreme risk of becoming violent have been unsuccessful. “My question today is now the time for a discussion of gun reform, or do we have to wait yet for another mass shooting?” said Sen. Jay Chaudhuri, a Wake County Democrat. House Speaker Tim Moore, a Cleveland County Republican, said in a statement later Tuesday that lawmakers for now “should remain focused on praying for the victims’ families and supporting law enforcement rather than seizing the moment for a political debate.” “We need to allow law enforcement to complete their investigation before jumping to any conclusions about policy changes,” Moore added.
North Dakota
Bismarck: The state health department stored thousands of COVID-19 vaccine doses at incorrect temperatures or without temperature data over the past two years, according to a state audit Tuesday that said some of the vaccine was administered to patients. The health department disputed the findings. Tim Wiedrich, who heads the agency’s virus response, said “no non-viable vaccine” was given to patients. In responses that accompanied the audit, the department said clerical errors or other errors of documentation erroneously suggested that expired or bad doses were given. “DoH uses redundant systems to ensure proper monitoring and distribution of vaccines prior to end of shelf life,” the agency said. A spokeswoman for the auditor’s office said it wasn’t recommending revaccinations. “We simply report on what we found,” auditor’s office spokeswoman Emily Dalzell said. “It would be up to the individual and their doctor to decide if revaccination is needed.” The state analysis said nearly 2,000 Moderna doses were stored at incorrect temperatures and were administered to patients. The audit also found that nearly 13,000 doses of the Pfizer vaccines were issued from storage with missing temperature data. The audit covered a two-year span that ended June 30. An inventory of the vaccines was conducted on Aug. 8, 2021, the audit said.
Ohio
Cleveland: The state Supreme Court on Tuesday removed from the bench a Cleveland municipal judge for misconduct and conducting court business “in a manner befitting a game show host,” investigators said. Judge Pinkey S. Carr was indefinitely suspended, and she agreed to undergo evaluations for her mental and physical health. The court said that Carr’s bench was littered with junk, dolls, cups and novelty items - her own attorney described it as “resembling a flea market.” She wore tank tops, T-shirts, spandex shorts and sneakers to court. And she discussed with staff and defendants a television show called “P-Valley” about a fictional Mississippi strip club. Carr joked about accepting kickbacks for lenient sentences if defendants gave her food, beverages, carpeting or storage space. She referred to her bailiff as “Miss Puddin from P-Valley.” In addition to a lack of decorum, Carr was found to have violated a long list of other rules.
Oklahoma
Oklahoma City: Gov. Kevin Stitt on Tuesday set a statewide election for March 7 for voters to decide whether to legalize the recreational use of marijuana, a question Democrats had hoped would be on the November ballot to help energize liberal voters. Oklahomans for Sensible Marijuana Laws gathered enough signatures to qualify the question for a statewide vote and thought the proposal would be on the ballot in November. But because it took longer than usual to count the signatures and for courts to consider legal challenges, there wasn’t enough time to print the ballots ahead of the November election. If approved by voters, the question would legalize the use of marijuana for any adult over the age of 21. Marijuana sales would be subjected to a 15% excise tax on top of the standard sales tax, and the revenue it generates would be used to help fund local municipalities, the court system, public schools, substance abuse treatment and the state’s general revenue fund. The proposal also outlines a judicial process for people to seek expungement or dismissal of prior marijuana-related convictions. Oklahoma already has one of the most robust medical marijuana programs in the country, with roughly 10% of the state’s residents having state-issued medical cards that allow them to purchase, grow and consume marijuana. Stitt said that while he supports the federal legalization of marijuana, he opposes the state question, saying the country’s patchwork of state laws on marijuana has become problematic.
Oregon
Salem: State Supreme Court Chief Justice Martha Walters said she’ll retire at the end of the year. Walters, who became the first woman to serve as chief justice of the Supreme Court in 2018, is the second justice this month to announce a retirement, giving Democrat Gov. Kate Brown two appointments to the state’s high court before she leaves office, Oregon Public Broadcasting reported. “I have loved the job of advocating for our courts and the critical need for access to the services we provide,” Walters said during remarks at a judicial conference where she made the announcement. Walters’ plan to retire comes amid an uncertain political future for the state because of the November gubernatorial election. With unaffiliated candidate Betsy Johnson likely to draw votes, polls have indicated that Republican candidate Christine Drazan and Democratic Tina Kotek are locked in a tight race. By retiring, Walters has ensured Brown will name a replacement who is likely to be aligned with Walters’ jurisprudence.
Pennsylvania
Pittsburgh: Newsroom workers at the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette have gone on strike demanding that the company reinstate the terms of its previous contract and return to the bargaining table. The Newspaper Guild of Pittsburgh said its members began picketing Tuesday outside the newsroom on the city’s North Shore and planned to continue the action Wednesday. Guild members have been working without a contract since 2017 and Monday voted to authorize an unfair labor practice strike against the company. On Oct. 6, workers from unions that are responsible for production, distribution and advertising at the Post-Gazette walked off the job. The Post-Gazette said in a statement that it would “continue to serve the Pittsburgh community, our readers and advertisers, despite any work stoppage.” Officials said they were confident the company would prevail when the National Labor Relations Board rules on the unfair labor practice accusation. The walkout is the first major newspaper strike in the city in three decades. In 1992, WESA reports, about 600 members of a Teamsters local representing truck drivers and circulation route managers went on strike against the Pittsburgh Press, which ended up being sold and merged with the Post-Gazette.
Rhode Island
North Kingstown: An orphaned bobcat found in the kitchen of a Glocester camp will soon return to the wild, said Arianna Mouradjian, director of operations at the Wildlife Clinic of Rhode Island, in North Kingstown. With an increase in the bobcat population in the state over the last two decades, the Saunderstown clinic has in recent years received several bobcats in need of its rehabilitative services, Mouradjian said. Still, she said, “Bobcats are one of those species we don’t see a lot of.” The most recent guest was rescued July 23 from Aldersgate Camp and Retreat Center in Glocester at about six weeks old. Bobcat kittens typically stay with their mothers 9 to 12 months. Through the end of summer and beginning of fall, she has lived in her own outdoor pen as the clinic staff give her time to grow big enough to fend for herself in the wild.
South Carolina
Greer: BMW will invest $1 billion in its sprawling factory near Spartanburg, South Carolina, to start building electric vehicles and an additional $700million to build a electric-battery plant nearby. The German automaker’s announcement Wednesday reflects its commitment to transitioning to electric-vehicle production in North America, in line with similarly ambitious plans by other major automakers. The investment in the 7-million-square-foot vehicle factory in Greer, in the foothills of the Blue Ridge Mountains, would add an unspecified number of jobs to the more than 11,000 workers there. The battery plant, to be built in nearby Woodruff, will employ 300, the company said, with hiring to begin within a few years. In addition, BMW said it has signed a deal with Envision AESC of Japan to supply battery cells for a new class of at least six electric SUVs that will be built at BMW’s plant in Greer by 2030. Envision will build its new factory at an unspecified site in South Carolina. The companies wouldn’t say how many people will be hired. But the number of jobs could be significant: Battery cell plants being built by other companies will employ between 1,100 and 2,200 workers.
South Dakota
Sioux Falls: A monkey with the Great Plains Zoo is recovering after facing recent surgery because of an injury sustained after the animal picked up a bottle cap someone threw in its enclosure. Kai, the Japanese macaque, had surgery Tuesday, according to a social media post by the zoo. He picked up a bottle top that had been tossed into the snow monkey exhibit, and tucked it into his cheek pouch. Eventually, the bottle cap wore its way through the cheek and needed to be removed. Despite the carefulness of the zoo’s veterinary team, he will have a scar, according to the post. The zoo posted details’s about Kai’s experience as a PSA for visitors to avoid future incidents. Objects the animal care team place in exhibits as enrichment are chosen with species-specific requirements in mind, according to the post. The zoo asked visitors if they drop something in by mistake, tell a zoo employee immediately.
Tennessee
Nashville:  Early voting kicked off Wednesday for the November midterm general election. The 14-day period of voting ahead of the Nov. 8 Election Day runs Mondays through Saturdays until Thursday, Nov. 3. The ballot features Republican Gov. Bill Lee’s reelection bid against Democrat Jason Martin, four constitutional amendments, U.S. House contests and state legislative races. Additionally, Tennessee’s deadline to request an absentee ballot to vote by mail is Nov. 1. Those ballots must be returned by mail in time for the county election commission to receive it no later than the close of polls on Election Day. The deadline to register to vote in the general election has passed. Voters can get more info at GoVoteTN.gov. Tennessee heads into the election with 4.55 million registered voters, an increase of about 127,800 since December 2021, according to the Tennessee secretary of state’s office.
Texas
Robstown:Former President Donald Trump plans a rally in what is shaping up as competitive South Texas on Saturday, just two days before the start of early voting ahead of the Nov. 8 elections. Trump, who in May was in Houston for a gathering of the National Rifle Association and two weeks earlier was in Austin as part of his “Save America Tour,” will be at the Richard M. Borchard Regional Fairgrounds in Robstown, about 20 miles west of Corpus Christi. In an advisory, Trump said he wants to “energize voters” by reminding them of the number of Republican candidates he has endorsed who have gone on to win elections, or at least their GOP primaries. During the March primaries, Trump endorsed Gov. Greg Abbott, Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick and Attorney General Ken Paxton, all of whom face competitive races from Democrats this cycle.
Utah
Zion National Park: Thirty-three immigrants gathered beneath Zion’s iconic 1,000-foot sandstone cliffs for the park’s first-ever naturalization ceremony on Tuesday. It was an unusual setting for a ceremony typically confined to courtrooms or office space run by the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Service in Salt Lake City. For residents of southwestern Utah, the locale meant they could avoid the four-hour trip north. “I’m so grateful for this moment, for my family,” said St. George resident Brenda Corsi, originally from Huacho, Peru. “I know that we have an amazing future.”
Vermont
Montpelier: The Vermont Supreme Court has rejected a request for bail from a man considered a person of interest in the shooting deaths of a couple in Concord, New Hampshire. In its Tuesday decision, the court unanimously rejected an appeal filed by attorneys for Logan Clegg, who was arrested last week in Vermont as a fugitive from justice from Utah. Clegg’s attorneys had argued he could not be held without bail prior to trial because the charge he is facing does not carry a potential sentence of life in prison. But the Vermont Supreme Court rejected that argument, saying that under Vermont law Clegg is not being held prior to trial, but as a fugitive from justice. When Clegg, 26, and homeless, was arrested by local police after being spotted detectives from Concord, South Burlington described him as a person of interest in an unsolved April homicide in Concord. The New Hampshire Attorney General’s office said police made contact in Vermont with a person of interest the April killings of Stephen and Djeswende Reid, but they didn’t name the person. No arrests have been made or charges filed in the killings. Clegg’s arrest on a fugitive from justice charge included a probation violation.
Virginia
Waynesboro: Police arrested a man over the weekend, charging him with attempted murder in Waynesboro, a press release said. Gage W. Mayne, 26, no fixed address, is facing charges of attempted second-degree murder, use of a firearm while attempting to commit murder, aggravated malicious wounding and four counts of obstruction of justice, the Waynesboro Police Department said. On Sunday morning shortly after midnight, Waynesboro officers responded to an address in the 2500 block of Village Drive. When police arrived, they encountered a 27-year-old man with what appeared to be a gunshot wound, the release said. During a preliminary investigation, officers identified Mayne as a suspect. He had already fled the scene in a vehicle. The vehicle Mayne was reportedly driving was found on the northeast side of Waynesboro. Police said Mayne was inside. He was placed into police custody without incident. Mayne is being held without bond at Middle River Regional Jail.
Washington
Seattle: The air quality west of the Cascades has deteriorated again as wildfires continue to burn. The Puget Sound Clean Air Agency sent out an alert Tuesday afternoon saying the smoke around Seattle was causing unhealthy air and that people should close windows and limit time outdoors. Other areas around Puget Sound were experiencing air considered unhealthy for sensitive groups or worse, the agency said. The smoke-laden air gave the Pacific Northwest the designation of worst air quality in the U.S. on Tuesday, KGW Meteorologist Joe Raineri said. Nine fires were burning in Washington and Oregon before a red flag warning for critical fire conditions was issued over the weekend. Some new fires started while the Nakia Creek Fire in southwest Washington took off, causing much of the smoky air seen around southwest Washington and Portland, officials said. In the Pacific Northwest, relief should come Friday. “Friday through Saturday will be cooler and more seasonable and we’ll finally get that rain. I think everyone’s excited about that,” National Weather Service meteorologist Kayla Mazurkiewicz told The Seattle Times. “We should have had a couple of inches by now.”
West Virginia
Huntington: A man has been charged in a woman’s 1993 slaying in the state, police said. Ricky Louie Woody, 59, of Billings, Montana, was charged earlier this month in the March 1993 death of Melissa Martinez in Huntington. She had a gunshot wound to the torso, lacerations to the head and died at a hospital, police said in a news release Tuesday. Witnesses initially provided information that led detectives to Woody, but there was insufficient evidence to charge him. Woody moved from Huntington to Billings within a year of Martinez’s death, the statement said. Billings detectives contacted Huntington police in May 2021 and indicated Woody told them he knew the person responsible for killing a woman known to him as “Lisa” in the early 1990s. Woody ultimately admitted he participated in her death, the statement said. Huntington detectives determined Woody was referring to the death of Martinez and interviewed him in September 2021 at a Billings jail, leading to the charges. Woody has waived extradition and will be returned to Huntington upon the resolution of the case in Montana, police said.
Wisconsin
Ashland County: A man whose 5-year-old daughter and her mother were killed in a car crash involving the state Senate’s minority leader has filed a wrongful death lawsuit against the lawmaker. Brandon Fink, whose daughter Khaleesi Fink and the girl’s mother, Alyssa Ortman, were killed in the July crash, filed the lawsuit Friday in Ashland County (Wisconsin) Circuit Court, the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reported. Court documents show that the family lived in Clearfield, Pennsylvania. The lawsuit, which seeks unspecified damages, names Democratic state Senate Minority Leader Janet Bewley, another driver and three insurance companies as defendants. Bewley, who represents a state Senate district that covers northwestern Wisconsin, pulled out of a Lake Superior beach entrance in Ashland on July 22 and into the path of a car driven by Ortman, according to police. When Ortman’s car collided with Bewley’s, it spun across Highway 2 and was hit by a vehicle driven by Jodi Munson, 45, of Washburn. Ortman’s 5-year-old daughter was pronounced dead at the crash scene. Ortman later died at a hospital, according to police. The Ashland police report, obtained by The Associated Press, says Bewley was distracted by her hands-free mobile phone at the time of the crash. The lawsuit alleges that all three drivers acted negligently. Bewley’s spokesperson, Joey Huey, said the state senator would have no comment.
Wyoming
Cody: A college wrestler helped his teammate survive a grizzly mauling over the weekend by trying to wrestle the massive bear off his friend, eventually drawing a more brutal attack to himself. The men are crediting their bonds as wrestling teammates at Northwest College in Cody, Wyoming, with helping them survive the attack Saturday evening southeast of Yellowstone National Park. Brady Lowry of Cedar City, Utah, suffered a broken arm and puncture wounds in the initial attack after they surprised the bear while searching for antlers shed by elk and deer in the Shoshone National Forest. “It shook me around and I didn’t know what to do,” Lowry told KSL-TV Monday in an interview from a hospital in Billings, Montana. “I curled up in a ball and it got me a few more times.” His teammate – Kendell Cummings of Evanston, Wyoming – tried to stop the attack on Lowry by yelling, kicking and hitting the bear and pulling on its fur. Wyoming wildlife officials said they will not try to capture and relocate or kill the bear because it was a surprise attack and because there are many other bears in the area, making it difficult for them to determine which bear was involved.
From USA TODAY Network and wire reports
This article originally appeared on USA TODAY: Animal rescue, flesh-eating bacteria, child marriage: News from around our 50 states
Load-Date: October 19, 2022



End of Document


THE INFRASTRUCTURE FAILURES DURING THE 2022 JACKSON, MISSISSIPPI FLOODS POINT TO A LARGER ISSUE
Targeted News Service
October 20, 2022 Thursday 9:20 AM  EST

Copyright 2022 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 586 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




(TNSres) -- Earth Day Network posted the following news on Oct. 19, 2022:
Heavy rains in late August 2022 resulted in the cresting of the Pearl River, causing flood waters to spill into the surrounding suburbs of Jackson, Mississippi. The flooding resulted in the disruption of water treatment systems, leaving tens of thousands in Bolivar and Hinds Counties under a boil water notice for weeks afterwards.
The communities surrounding the capital region of Mississippi are no strangers to flooding and potable water issues. A similar event occurred on the Pearl River in February 2020, where water treatment pumps failed to alleviate the flood waters. Many locals remember the 1979 Easter Flood where intense rainfall and flooding of the Pearl River caused over $1 billion in damages in today's dollars around the Jackson area.
Situated within a river delta, the low-lying and permeable delta soils make the region extremely susceptible to subsidence (the sinking of land) and flooding. Its proximity to the coast of the Gulf of Mexico and its annual hurricane season make the region sensitive to the slightest changes in climate.
Mississippi's Department of Environmental Quality's Delta Sustainable Water Resources Task Force was created in 2014 to oversee sustainable water usage, but recent failures and irregularities in enforcement have put its effectiveness into question. The flooding in late August was exacerbated by equipment failures at the O.B. Curtis Water Treatment Plant, leaving much of Hinds County without safe drinking water. With proper upkeep of municipal infrastructure, it is likely that breakdowns like this can be preventable.
The lack of funding for critical municipal services is a systemic issue decades in the making. Protests for equitable distribution of federal funds for Black neighborhoods in 1970 succeeded, but have since rarely been achieved. With Bolivar and Hinds Counties' populations majority Black, the lack of funding for these counties' infrastructure compared to the wealthier and majority white Madison County is notable.
The failure to properly upkeep vital infrastructure in a county where nearly 26% of its population is in poverty is an indicator of which communities will face the front lines of the damages of climate change going forward. As climate change makes severe weather events more intense, the Mississippi Delta Region will continue to see more flooding events. If infrastructure for these vulnerable communities is not properly funded, we will continue to see similar municipal injustices over and over again.
EARTHDAY.ORG's campaign Invest in our Planet encourages our partners and communities to take steps to ensure we leave to future generations a planet worth inhabiting. Investing from the bottom up by ensuring stable infrastructure for those most vulnerable to climate change must be a priority. Access to safe drinking water, especially in times of severe weather, is a necessity if communities on the front line of climate change are to survive.
Suffering caused by severe weather events will only be exacerbated by deteriorated infrastructure in the Mississippi Delta Region. Proper funding for upkeep and improvements to existing infrastructure is a necessary first step towards public safety and trust in the system.
* * *
Original text here: https://www.earthday.org/the-infrastructure-failures-during-the-2022-jackson-mississippi-floods-point-to-a-larger-issue/
[Category: Environment]
Copyright Targeted News Services
T40-MgEditor-7977544 T40-MgEditor
Load-Date: October 21, 2022



End of Document


EPA civil rights case targets Mississippi over Jackson water
The Associated Press
October 20, 2022 Thursday 11:50 PM GMT

Copyright 2022 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS; POLITICAL NEWS; STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 943 words
Byline: EMILY WAGSTER PETTUS, MATTHEW DALY and AARON MORRISON, Associated Press
Dateline: JACKSON, Miss. 
Body




JACKSON, Miss. — The federal government is investigating whether Mississippi state agencies discriminated against the state's majority-Black capital city by refusing to fund improvements for its failing water system, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency said Thursday.
The announcement came days after leaders of two congressional committees said they were starting a joint investigation into a crisis that left most homes and businesses in Jackson without running water for several days in late August and early September.
The EPA gave The Associated Press the first confirmation that it is conducting a civil, not criminal, investigation of the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality and the Mississippi State Department of Health. The federal agency could withhold money from the state if it finds wrongdoing — potentially millions of dollars. If the state agencies don’t cooperate with the investigation, the EPA could refer the case to the Department of Justice.
Heavy rainfall in late August exacerbated problems at Jackson's main water treatment facility. Republican Gov. Tate Reeves declared an emergency Aug. 29, and the state health department and the Mississippi Emergency Management Agency have been overseeing operations and repairs at the facility since then.
About 80% of Jackson’s 150,000 residents are Black, and about a quarter of the population lives in poverty. By the time Reeves issued the emergency order, Jackson residents had already been told for a month to boil their water to kill possible contaminants. Volunteers and the National Guard had distributed millions of bottles of drinking water. Although the boil-water notice was lifted in mid-September, many residents remain skeptical about water safety.
NAACP President Derrick Johnson, who lives in Jackson with his family, called the EPA investigation a step in the right direction after years of the state withholding federal funds to improve the city’s water system.
“We believe we gave compelling evidence that the state of Mississippi intentionally starved the city of Jackson of the resources to maintain its water infrastructure,” Johnson told The AP on Thursday. “We want the EPA and this administration to put forth a course of action to prevent the state of Mississippi from ever doing this again.”
Johnson was named among several residents in the NAACP’s civil rights complaint against Mississippi. He said the state’s inaction and record of divestment in Jackson amounts to “systemic neglect.”
“We believe that all citizens of this country should be entitled to clean, fresh drinking water,” Johnson said. “Unfortunately, we live in a state that is still dealing in racial politics. And as a result of that, you have state leaders who seek to penalize African American residents of the city of Jackson in a very discriminatory way.”
The AP reported in September that years before Reeves became governor, he touted his own track record of fiscal conservatism by citing his opposition to spending state money for Jackson's crumbling water and sewer infrastructure. The EPA is not investigating Reeves.
Reeves said Thursday that the state took control of Jackson’s water system because of “absolute and total incompetence” of the city's Democratic mayor and administration. The governor’s latest remarks are an escalation of a dispute between him and Mayor Chokwe Antar Lumumba over whether the state or the city will decide on a private firm to operate Jackson’s water system.
“They have proven that they have no ability to manage the water system,” Reeves told reporters during an event at the Governor’s Mansion, according to a video of the event by WLBT-TV.
A city spokeswoman said Lumumba would not respond to the governor's statements.
In a federal complaint Sept. 27, the NAACP said Mississippi officials “all but assured” a drinking water calamity by depriving Jackson of badly needed funds to upgrade its infrastructure. The organization asked the EPA to investigate the state’s alleged pattern of steering money to majority-white communities with less need.
The group said the state’s refusal to fund improvements in Jackson culminated in the near-total collapse of the water system in late August. Over 25 years, Jackson received funds from an important federal program only three times, the NAACP said. When Jackson tried to fund improvements itself, those efforts were repeatedly blocked by state political leaders, according to the complaint.
The NAACP wants the EPA to make sure that from now on, federal funds are distributed equitably.
Reeves said Thursday that the state has bought chemicals and hired workers for the water plant since he declared the emergency, after the city failed to do both of those things.
The NAACP filed its complaint under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which forbids recipients of federal funds from discriminating based on race or national origin. While previously the law was rarely used to pursue environmental matters, the Biden administration has increased its enforcement efforts in communities overburdened by pollution.
Recently, the EPA said it had preliminary evidence that Louisiana officials allowed air pollution to remain high and downplayed the threat to Black residents who live in the industrial section of the state commonly referred to as cancer alley. The agency has also opened up an investigation into Colorado’s air permitting program and into state and local officials in Alabama over chronic wastewater problems in majority-Black Lowndes County.
___
Associated Press writer Michael Phillis in St. Louis contributed to this report. Daly reported from Washington and Morrison reported from New York.
Load-Date: October 20, 2022



End of Document


EPA civil rights case targets Mississippi over Jackson water
Associated Press International
October 20, 2022 Thursday 11:50 PM GMT

Copyright 2022 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS; POLITICAL NEWS; STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 944 words
Byline: EMILY WAGSTER PETTUS, MATTHEW DALY and AARON MORRISON, Associated Press
Dateline: JACKSON, Miss. 
Body




JACKSON, Miss. (AP) — The federal government is investigating whether Mississippi state agencies discriminated against the state's majority-Black capital city by refusing to fund improvements for its failing water system, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency said Thursday.
The announcement came days after leaders of two congressional committees said they were starting a joint investigation into a crisis that left most homes and businesses in Jackson without running water for several days in late August and early September.
The EPA gave The Associated Press the first confirmation that it is conducting a civil, not criminal, investigation of the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality and the Mississippi State Department of Health. The federal agency could withhold money from the state if it finds wrongdoing — potentially millions of dollars. If the state agencies don’t cooperate with the investigation, the EPA could refer the case to the Department of Justice.
Heavy rainfall in late August exacerbated problems at Jackson's main water treatment facility. Republican Gov. Tate Reeves declared an emergency Aug. 29, and the state health department and the Mississippi Emergency Management Agency have been overseeing operations and repairs at the facility since then.
About 80% of Jackson’s 150,000 residents are Black, and about a quarter of the population lives in poverty. By the time Reeves issued the emergency order, Jackson residents had already been told for a month to boil their water to kill possible contaminants. Volunteers and the National Guard had distributed millions of bottles of drinking water. Although the boil-water notice was lifted in mid-September, many residents remain skeptical about water safety.
NAACP President Derrick Johnson, who lives in Jackson with his family, called the EPA investigation a step in the right direction after years of the state withholding federal funds to improve the city’s water system.
“We believe we gave compelling evidence that the state of Mississippi intentionally starved the city of Jackson of the resources to maintain its water infrastructure,” Johnson told The AP on Thursday. “We want the EPA and this administration to put forth a course of action to prevent the state of Mississippi from ever doing this again.”
Johnson was named among several residents in the NAACP’s civil rights complaint against Mississippi. He said the state’s inaction and record of divestment in Jackson amounts to “systemic neglect.”
“We believe that all citizens of this country should be entitled to clean, fresh drinking water,” Johnson said. “Unfortunately, we live in a state that is still dealing in racial politics. And as a result of that, you have state leaders who seek to penalize African American residents of the city of Jackson in a very discriminatory way.”
The AP reported in September that years before Reeves became governor, he touted his own track record of fiscal conservatism by citing his opposition to spending state money for Jackson's crumbling water and sewer infrastructure. The EPA is not investigating Reeves.
Reeves said Thursday that the state took control of Jackson’s water system because of “absolute and total incompetence” of the city's Democratic mayor and administration. The governor’s latest remarks are an escalation of a dispute between him and Mayor Chokwe Antar Lumumba over whether the state or the city will decide on a private firm to operate Jackson’s water system.
“They have proven that they have no ability to manage the water system,” Reeves told reporters during an event at the Governor’s Mansion, according to a video of the event by WLBT-TV.
A city spokeswoman said Lumumba would not respond to the governor's statements.
In a federal complaint Sept. 27, the NAACP said Mississippi officials “all but assured” a drinking water calamity by depriving Jackson of badly needed funds to upgrade its infrastructure. The organization asked the EPA to investigate the state’s alleged pattern of steering money to majority-white communities with less need.
The group said the state’s refusal to fund improvements in Jackson culminated in the near-total collapse of the water system in late August. Over 25 years, Jackson received funds from an important federal program only three times, the NAACP said. When Jackson tried to fund improvements itself, those efforts were repeatedly blocked by state political leaders, according to the complaint.
The NAACP wants the EPA to make sure that from now on, federal funds are distributed equitably.
Reeves said Thursday that the state has bought chemicals and hired workers for the water plant since he declared the emergency, after the city failed to do both of those things.
The NAACP filed its complaint under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which forbids recipients of federal funds from discriminating based on race or national origin. While previously the law was rarely used to pursue environmental matters, the Biden administration has increased its enforcement efforts in communities overburdened by pollution.
Recently, the EPA said it had preliminary evidence that Louisiana officials allowed air pollution to remain high and downplayed the threat to Black residents who live in the industrial section of the state commonly referred to as cancer alley. The agency has also opened up an investigation into Colorado’s air permitting program and into state and local officials in Alabama over chronic wastewater problems in majority-Black Lowndes County.
___
Associated Press writer Michael Phillis in St. Louis contributed to this report. Daly reported from Washington and Morrison reported from New York.
Load-Date: October 20, 2022



End of Document


EPA civil rights case targets Mississippi over Jackson water
Associated Press State & Local
October 20, 2022 Thursday 11:50 PM GMT

Copyright 2022 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS; POLITICAL NEWS; STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 944 words
Byline: EMILY WAGSTER PETTUS, MATTHEW DALY and AARON MORRISON, Associated Press
Dateline: JACKSON, Miss. 
Body




JACKSON, Miss. (AP) — The federal government is investigating whether Mississippi state agencies discriminated against the state's majority-Black capital city by refusing to fund improvements for its failing water system, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency said Thursday.
The announcement came days after leaders of two congressional committees said they were starting a joint investigation into a crisis that left most homes and businesses in Jackson without running water for several days in late August and early September.
The EPA gave The Associated Press the first confirmation that it is conducting a civil, not criminal, investigation of the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality and the Mississippi State Department of Health. The federal agency could withhold money from the state if it finds wrongdoing — potentially millions of dollars. If the state agencies don’t cooperate with the investigation, the EPA could refer the case to the Department of Justice.
Heavy rainfall in late August exacerbated problems at Jackson's main water treatment facility. Republican Gov. Tate Reeves declared an emergency Aug. 29, and the state health department and the Mississippi Emergency Management Agency have been overseeing operations and repairs at the facility since then.
About 80% of Jackson’s 150,000 residents are Black, and about a quarter of the population lives in poverty. By the time Reeves issued the emergency order, Jackson residents had already been told for a month to boil their water to kill possible contaminants. Volunteers and the National Guard had distributed millions of bottles of drinking water. Although the boil-water notice was lifted in mid-September, many residents remain skeptical about water safety.
NAACP President Derrick Johnson, who lives in Jackson with his family, called the EPA investigation a step in the right direction after years of the state withholding federal funds to improve the city’s water system.
“We believe we gave compelling evidence that the state of Mississippi intentionally starved the city of Jackson of the resources to maintain its water infrastructure,” Johnson told The AP on Thursday. “We want the EPA and this administration to put forth a course of action to prevent the state of Mississippi from ever doing this again.”
Johnson was named among several residents in the NAACP’s civil rights complaint against Mississippi. He said the state’s inaction and record of divestment in Jackson amounts to “systemic neglect.”
“We believe that all citizens of this country should be entitled to clean, fresh drinking water,” Johnson said. “Unfortunately, we live in a state that is still dealing in racial politics. And as a result of that, you have state leaders who seek to penalize African American residents of the city of Jackson in a very discriminatory way.”
The AP reported in September that years before Reeves became governor, he touted his own track record of fiscal conservatism by citing his opposition to spending state money for Jackson's crumbling water and sewer infrastructure. The EPA is not investigating Reeves.
Reeves said Thursday that the state took control of Jackson’s water system because of “absolute and total incompetence” of the city's Democratic mayor and administration. The governor’s latest remarks are an escalation of a dispute between him and Mayor Chokwe Antar Lumumba over whether the state or the city will decide on a private firm to operate Jackson’s water system.
“They have proven that they have no ability to manage the water system,” Reeves told reporters during an event at the Governor’s Mansion, according to a video of the event by WLBT-TV.
A city spokeswoman said Lumumba would not respond to the governor's statements.
In a federal complaint Sept. 27, the NAACP said Mississippi officials “all but assured” a drinking water calamity by depriving Jackson of badly needed funds to upgrade its infrastructure. The organization asked the EPA to investigate the state’s alleged pattern of steering money to majority-white communities with less need.
The group said the state’s refusal to fund improvements in Jackson culminated in the near-total collapse of the water system in late August. Over 25 years, Jackson received funds from an important federal program only three times, the NAACP said. When Jackson tried to fund improvements itself, those efforts were repeatedly blocked by state political leaders, according to the complaint.
The NAACP wants the EPA to make sure that from now on, federal funds are distributed equitably.
Reeves said Thursday that the state has bought chemicals and hired workers for the water plant since he declared the emergency, after the city failed to do both of those things.
The NAACP filed its complaint under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which forbids recipients of federal funds from discriminating based on race or national origin. While previously the law was rarely used to pursue environmental matters, the Biden administration has increased its enforcement efforts in communities overburdened by pollution.
Recently, the EPA said it had preliminary evidence that Louisiana officials allowed air pollution to remain high and downplayed the threat to Black residents who live in the industrial section of the state commonly referred to as cancer alley. The agency has also opened up an investigation into Colorado’s air permitting program and into state and local officials in Alabama over chronic wastewater problems in majority-Black Lowndes County.
___
Associated Press writer Michael Phillis in St. Louis contributed to this report. Daly reported from Washington and Morrison reported from New York.
Load-Date: October 20, 2022



End of Document


GOVERNOR RON DESANTIS ISSUES UPDATES ON HURRICANE IAN RECOVERY ON OCTOBER 20, 2022
States News Service
October 20, 2022 Thursday

Copyright 2022 States News Service
Length: 5669 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: TALLAHASSEE, FL 
Body




The following information was released by the office of the Governor of Florida:
Today, Governor Ron DeSantis visited Fort Myers Beach to announce that he signed Executive Order 22-242 to extend the deadline for property taxes in counties that have been impacted by Hurricane Ian. The Governor also announced that he is working with the Legislature to call a special session in December to address property tax obligations and solutions to stabilize Florida's property insurance market. Additionally, the Governor announced that he would be waiving an eligibility requirement of the Florida Small Business Emergency Bridge Loan Program to allow sole proprietors in the Marine Fisheries Industry with businesses located in Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Hardee, Lee, and Sarasota counties to receive critical assistance. To watch the Governor's full remarks, click here.
First Lady Casey DeSantis has continued to highlight the Florida Disaster Fund and the support it has received from private entities across the nation. The Florida Disaster Fund has raised over $45 million since activation. To read more, click here. To contribute, please visit www.FloridaDisasterFund.org or text DISASTER to 20222.
First Lady Casey DeSantis has worked to expand mental health in response to Hurricane Ian. The First Lady has also worked with the State Disaster Recovery Mental Health Coordinator, Sara Newhouse, to compile a comprehensive webpage of resources to help navigate available resources for mental health needs post hurricane. To visit the site, click here.
To guide Floridians looking for their next-steps as they rebuild, FloridaStormRelief.com has launched to serve as a one-stop-shop to navigate assistance that is available. This webpage highlights the resources available through the state's public and private partners, and faith-based organizations. Here you can find a step-by-step check list for Floridians recovering following Hurricane Ian, mental health resiliency resources and ways to help Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian. This website also has a list of resources available to help your business recover following the storm.
State response efforts include:
Florida Division of Emergency Management (FDEM)
At the request of Governor DeSantis, FDEM worked with federal partners to secure an additional 30 days of 100% federal cost share for Public Assistance Category A (debris removal) and Category B (emergency protective measures) for Hurricane Ian recovery efforts. More information can be found here.
Counties eligible for FEMA Individual Assistance include Brevard, Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Flagler, Glades, Hardee, Hendry, Highlands, Hillsborough, Lake, Lee, Manatee, Monroe, Okeechobee, Orange, Osceola, Palm Beach, Pasco, Pinellas, Polk, Putnam, Sarasota, Seminole, St. Johns and Volusia. . As of October 20, there were 663,097 valid registrations with more than $545 million approved. Impacted residents can apply at DisasterAssistance.gov or visit an open Disaster Recovery Center (DRC).
FDEM has worked with FEMA to activate the Transitional Sheltering Assistance (TSA) Program for impacted residents in counties declared for FEMA Individual Assistance. FDEM will continue to work with FEMA to determine additional unmet needs for residents in newly declared counties for Individual Assistance. Individuals can apply for disaster assistance and may be eligible for TSA if they cannot return to their home.
FDEM has also worked with the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) to make long-term, low-interest disaster loans available to homeowners, renters, businesses and nonprofit organizations to cover losses not fully compensated by insurance and other sources. Counties eligible for SBA disaster loans include Brevard, Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Glades, Hardee, Hendry, Highlands, Hillsborough, Lake, Lee, Manatee, Monroe, Palm Beach, Pasco, Pinellas, Sarasota, Okeechobee, Orange, Osceola, Polk, Seminole, Flagler, Putnam, St. Johns and Volusia counties, and the contiguous Alachua, Bradford, Broward, Clay, Duval, Hernando, Indian River, Marion, Martin, Miami-Dade, St. Lucie and Sumter counties. As of October 20, more than $130 million has been approved. Individuals can apply online using the Electronic Loan Application on the SBA's secure website at DisasterLoanAssistance.SBA.gov. Information and applications can also be obtained by calling 800-659-2955 or by visiting a Business Recovery Center.
FDEM is mobilizing generators and water pumps for Sanibel Island as infrastructure inspections are completed and facilities can begin operating.
FDEM is working with St. Augustine maintenance crews to begin restoration of impacted dunes to be completed before turtle nesting season.
Nearly 500 STARLINK Units have been distributed to businesses and responders in impacted communities to provide Internet connection.
FDEM has authorized 294 Debris Management Sites to reduce and remove debris from impacted areas.
FDEM is working with Charlotte and Lee County School Districts to provide solutions on temporary repairs and ensure schools reopen as soon as possible for students
Power
Power has been restored to all accounts on the mainland which can receive it.
As of today, over 97% of accounts that can receive power on Pine Island have been restored, significantly ahead of the estimated restoration timeline.
For a full report on current outages, click here.
Internet Connectivity
If you are a Xfinity customer experiencing internet connectivity issues and you live in a predominately restored location and find that after restarting your modem your services are still not working, the lines delivering service to your home may be damaged. Please go to the Status Center to troubleshoot or use your Xfinity App to chat with a representative or call 1-800-XFINITY (1-800-934-6489) to report your service interruption.
ATandT is waiving talk, text, and data overage charges for ATandT Postpaid and PREPAID customers with billing addresses in 828 zip codes across Florida from September 28, 2022, through October 28, 2022, to keep customers connected before, during and after any major storm event. ATandT is welcoming other carriers' customers to roam on its networks so they can connect, even if their carrier's service isn't available after the storm. Since opening the ATandT network last week for roaming, we've handled about 47 TBs of traffic from other carriers to help keep those in impacted areas connected. 47 TBs of data is equal to more than 16 billion text messages. Store locations and hours are available at www.att.com/stores.
Comcast has Xfinity WiFi vans provide free internet connectivity as communities continue to recover from Hurricane Ian. Each Xfinity WiFi van can provide wireless internet connectivity to more than 1,000 users at one time over a 300-square-foot area. The vans will be available from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily at the following locations until further notice:
Cape Coral: Walmart Supercenter, 1619 Del Prado Boulevard South, Cape Coral, FL
Bonita Springs: Bonita Springs Public Library, 2687 Pine Ave., Bonita Springs, FL
Fort Myers: Walmart Supercenter, 17105 San Carlos Blvd., Fort Myers, FL
Port Charlotte: Walmart Neighborhood Market (Charlotte Square) at 2150 Tamiami Trail, Port Charlotte, FL
As residents of Southwest Florida continue to recover, Verizon is extending its support for counties most impacted by Hurricane Ian. Consumer and small business customers in the following counties will continue to receive unlimited calling, texting, and mobile data through October 31, 2022, in Charlotte, Collier, Desoto, Hardee, Lee, and Sarasota counties. Verizon has deployed Wireless Emergency Connection Centers (WECCs) to assist Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian with wi-fi, phone batteries, and charging stations. These stations are available to any customer of any carrier stay connected. WECCs are available at the following locations:
Fort Myers Town Hall, 2525 Estero Boulevard, Fort Myers Beach, FL
Lakes Regional Library 15290 Bass Road, Fort Myers, FL
Fishers of Men Lutheran Church, 10360 Stringfellow Rd, St James City, FL
Additionally, charging pedestals are available at the following locations:
Estero Community Center, 9200 Corkscrew Palms Boulevard, Estero, FL 33928
North Collier Regional Park, 15000 Livingston Road, Naples, FL 34116
Health and Human Services
The Florida Department of Health and Florida Department of Children and Families have partnered with BetterHelp to offer three months of free mental health services via online therapy to those impacted by Hurricane Ian. To access these free services, visit betterhelp.com/voucher and enter code: HurricaneIan. Visitors to BetterHelp's site will be prompted to answer a questionnaire that will match those impacted residents with a licensed mental health professional.
Boil Water Notices have been issued for 38 areas, over 9 counties, following the impacts from Hurricane Ian. DOH continues to monitor and maintain a comprehensive statewide list of notices for residents to access online.
DOH's Division of Disease Control and Health Protection has deployed an environmental health strike team in Seminole County to assist with private well water testing at flood impacted homes.
DOH County Health Departments have been deployed to all Disaster Recovery Centers to provide services and resources. This includes Women and Infant Care, Vital Statistics, and other public health services. Costs for any vital statistics, such as birth and death certificates, have been waived.
DOH's Division of Children's Medical Services' Early Steps and Newborn Screening programs has sent additional supplies to Ft. Myers. Nearly 1,000 waterproof bags with essential supplies including hand sanitizer, silicone bibs, thermometers, baby spoons, and cooling towels for moms and babies to be distributed to families in impacted communities.
102 clients have received weather-related Emergency Home Assistance for the Elder Program funds to assist with individuals experiencing a home energy emergency in the affected areas.
Infrastructure
All accessible State-owned bridges have been inspected across Florida. FDOT continues to assist with inspections on locally owned bridges.
Access restored to Pine Island Bridge in just over 50 hours/ under 3 days.
Access restored to Sanibel Causeway in 15 days 10 days ahead of schedule.
Access restored to Sanibel Causeway in 15 days- 10 days ahead of schedule.
Florida Tolls reinstated at 6 a.m. on Saturday, October 15, with the exception of Alligator Alley, Pinellas Bayway, and Sunshine Skyway. Tolls at those three facilities remain suspended.
Initial debris pick-up:
4,415 miles of state roads have been completed statewide.
Statewide 89,420 cubic yards of vegetation debris have been picked up.
Roadways (state roads and interstates)
Roads Closed as of 11 a.m. on 10/15/22
Brevard County
SR-46 Westbound at Hatbill Road Lane closed
Charlotte County
Bridge closed on Rotonda Boulevard both directions at Rotonda Boulevard South
DeSoto County
NW 2nd Bunker Avenue at Arrowhead Pond Road Lane closed, both directions
SR-72 Westbound beyond SR-70 All lanes closed
SR-72 from NW Pearce Street to SR-70 Lane closed
Hardee County
N Hollandtown Road at Thoroughbred Road Lane closed, both directions
SR-64 from Brantwood Drive to Wilbur C King Boulevard Lane closed, both directions
Highlands County
Golfview Road at Lake Drive Boulevard Lane closed, both directions
Marble Avenue from W Martin Road to S Lake Boulevard Lane closed, both directions
Polk County
E Grove Avenue at S Scenic Highway Lane closed, both directions
Seminole County
SR-46 Eastbound at N Jungle Road Lane closed
Freight Rail
Seminole Gulf Railway sustained significant damage. Damage assessments continue and repair plans are underway. They are operating on their Sarasota line.
Mass Care
DCF launched the Disaster Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (D-SNAP), which is being implemented in phases by county. Phase one includes Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Hardee, Lee, Polk, and Sarasota counties. Phase two includes Flagler, Highlands, Manatee, Orange, Pinellas, and St. Johns. Pre-registration is required by all applicants.
As of October 19, 140,634 households have pre-registered. To expedite service to eligible households, DCF is offering phone interviews through the D-SNAP Call Center. Details can be found online at MyFLFamilies.com/DSNAP.
As of October 19, DCF has disbursed $41 million.
DBPR investigators and other staffers from across the state are at all the Disaster Recovery Centers in Charlotte, Collier, Lee and Sarasota Counties, helping with any licensing needs and educating the public about the importance of hiring a licensed contractor.
Area Agency on Aging staff have been serving older Floridians at Disaster Recovery Centers. To date, 221 seniors have been assisted through the DRCs.
Senior Resource Alliance, serving Orange, Osceola, Seminole, and Brevard, and their providers are helping displaced seniors that are currently living in a hotel in Kissimmee. Services include a congregate meal site at the hotel, help with FEMA applications and legal issues, transportation, and distribution of snacks, water, clothing, and supplies.
DOEA now has 231 registered Hope Heroes. Volunteer opportunities and requests for donated items and services to help seniors affected by Hurricane Ian are going out daily. To join the mission, visit helpcreatehope.com.
DCF has two new Family Resource Support Centers in Deltona and New Smyrna Beach. FRSCs are staffed with Hope Navigators, crisis counselors who specialize in disaster recovery response, and public benefit eligibility specialists to help individuals and families. More information can be found at MyFLFamilies.com/FRSC.
Florida Housing Finance Corporation has updated its Disaster Relief webpage to provide families with information on housing resources and assistance. This webpage will continue to be updated as more information becomes available. Disaster Relief Resources and Information (floridahousing.org).
Law Enforcement
FLHSMV has deployed Florida Licensing on Wheels (FLOW) mobile units to Lee, Charlotte, Sarasota, and Collier counties to provide no-fee replacements for driver license and identification credentials, vehicle registrations, and titles.
Dates, locations, and hours of operation for FLOW mobiles are subject to change and will be announced on FLHSMV.gov
FLOW Locations:
Sarasota County
Disaster Recovery Center
Shannon Staub Library
4675 Career Lane, North Port, FL 34289
Lee County
Disaster Recovery Center
Lakes Regional Library
15290 Bass Road, Fort Myers, FL 33919
Disaster Recovery Center
Joseph P. D'Alessandro Office Complex
2295 Victoria Ave., Ft. Myers, FL 33901
Del Tura Plaza
18900 North Tamiami Trail, North Fort Myers, FL 33903
Charlotte County
Port Charlotte Town Center
1441 Tamiami Trail, Port Charlotte, FL 33948
Collier County
Disaster Recovery Center
Veterans Community Park
1895 Veterans Park Dr, Naples, FL 34110
o FLOW Hours of Operation: 9:00am 6:00pm, seven days a week
As of October 19, more than 4,700 customers have been served since operations began.
FDLE has four response teams and one logistical support team deployed in Lee and Charlotte counties checking in law enforcement officers reporting for duty, maintaining the base camps and matching law enforcement resources to the identified needs.
FHP's fixed-wing aircraft and unmanned aerial systems are aiding in FDOT's efforts as they continue to undertake bridge and other infrastructure repairs.
FHP continues to provide escorts for fuel, utility, and emergency response teams to provide critical resources to the impacted areas.
FHP is assisting multiple local agencies with law enforcement functions in the impacted areas.
More than 1,700 sworn FHP members are available to assist with enhanced response efforts.
Peer support is available 24/7 to all FHP members and their families through FHP's Peer Support Team and the FHP Wellness App to support their overall wellness.
FHP encourages motorists to report disabled vehicles or dangerous driving conditions to *FHP (*347).
FLHSMV driver license and motor vehicle service center closures can be found here.
FLHSMV has issued Emergency Order 092422, which:
Waives specific requirements for commercial motor vehicles providing emergency relief; and
Waives the replacement fees for driver's license and identification credentials, vehicle registrations and titles, vessel registrations and titles and temporary parking permits for impacted individuals.
The FWC has established a field base of operations in Lee County and deployed two mobile command centers and 6 BERG units to provide communications and operational support to officers in the area while they respond to calls for assistance.
A total of approximately 52 FWC officers and support personnel are currently deployed for Hurricane Ian response and recovery efforts with a full complement of four-wheel drive vehicles, vessels and response and recovery equipment and supplies have arrived in Lee County.
17 FWC officers from across the state have deployed to assess and process thousands of vessels displaced due to the storm.
FWC officers are conducting 24-hour land-based and waterborne safety and security patrols around Sanibel Island and other barrier islands to protect people and property on the islands.
FWC Aviation Section is providing the State EOC with aerial assistance, reconnaissance and post-storm damage assessments.
The FWC has established a Hurricane Ian Vessel Hotline for vessel and property owners affected by vessels displaced by Hurricane Ian. The public is encouraged to call 850-488-5600 M-F, 8 a.m. 5 p.m. for more information about displaced vessels or vessels in state waters that have been rendered derelict by Hurricane Ian.
More than 1,300 vessels have been assessed by FWC displaced vessel teams.
If a vessel owner is removing their vessel, they should notify the Hurricane Ian Vessel Hotline of their plans for vessel removal by calling 850-488-5600 M-F, 8 a.m. 5 p.m.
FWC cautions all boaters to exercise extreme caution in waterways in areas affected by Hurricane Ian and encourages boaters to report missing or damaged waterway markers by calling 866-405-2869 or by filling out an online form at: https://myfwc.com/boating/waterway/markers/damaged-or-missing/.
Private Sector Support
Florida was approved for $30 million for the National Dislocated Worker Grant for Floridians without work due to Hurricane Ian, which DEO applied for through the U.S. Department of Labor on October 4, 2022.
DEO staff and volunteers are providing in-person services and surging resources to five Disaster Recover Center locations located in Lee, Charlotte, Sarasota, and Collier Counties. Locations for DRCs are available on www.FloridaDisaster.org.
Business Recovery Centers, represented by the U.S. Small Business Administration and the Florida Small Business Development Center network. Visit www.FloridaSBDC.org/disaster/loan-assistance/ to find a location near you.
Uber is offering free round-trip rides, up to $30 each way, to and from 10 state-approved Disaster Recovery Centers (DRC). At these centers, those whose livelihoods have been severely affected by Hurricane Ian will be able to apply for federal assistance and disaster loans, update applications, and learn about other resources available. Details on how to redeem a free round trip, up to $30 each way, to and from a state-approved DRC are available at www.FloridaDisaster.biz/CurrentDisasterUpdates.
Work search reporting and other requirements for Reemployment Assistance claims have been temporarily waived for Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian in FEMA disaster-declared counties. Eligible Floridians must file for regular state Reemployment Assistance benefits before applying for Disaster Unemployment Assistance (DUA). DUA is available for individuals and businesses in FEMA disaster-declared counties. Learn more here.
Over 15,400 DUA claims have been submitted since DUA was activated and more than 7,500 have been approved.
To support Floridians during this time, DEO has deployed personnel to the field and extended call center hours to seven days per week. Additionally, DEO secured six ID.me kiosks and support technicians to reduce the number of fraudulent claims. DEO is expanding the number of agents available to review and process claims.
All these efforts are focused on reducing the processing time so DUA benefits can be expedited to Floridians in need.
DEO and CareerSource Florida have activated the disaster recovery jobs portal to connect businesses and people impacted by Hurricane Ian with workforce programs. To look for employment opportunities or post disaster-related jobs to help rebuild Florida's communities impacted by Hurricane Ian, visit Florida's Disaster Recovery Jobs Portal at disasterrecovery.employflorida.com.
CareerSource Florida is working with DEO to support recovery efforts and help connect affected residents with temporary employment. All career centers are open statewide. To find your local career center, visit Find Your Local Team or Career Center Directory.
CareerSource South Florida and CareerSource Pasco Hernando locations have deployed mobile units to the Fort Myers Disaster Recovery Center.
CareerSource Southwest Florida has deployed volunteers to the Disaster Recovery Center to assist impacted individuals.
The Florida Small Business Emergency Bridge Loan Program has been activated to assist small businesses that have been impacted by Hurricane Ian with short-term, zero-interest loans to meet the businesses' immediate financial needs and "bridge the gap" until longer term funding sources become available. Small businesses in the most impacted counties will be escalated and prioritized as they are received. Visit www.FloridaJobs.org/EBL to learn more.
DEO is updating www.FloridaDisaster.biz with real-time information for business owners, their families, and employees for Hurricane Ian.
DEO's Rebuild Florida team continues to work with homeowners to assess any damage that may have occurred to Hurricane Irma projects from Hurricane Ian. The team continues to rotate deployed staff to Ian-impacted areas, supporting recovery efforts.
Enterprise Florida activated its Disaster Assistance page with a list of state and federal resources available for businesses to utilize in their mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery activities.
Airbnb has launched a special website to help Hurricane Ian Relocation efforts for impacted residents at Airbnb.com/hurricaneianflorida. The page features open (vacant and available for rent) properties that are available to be booked outside of the FEMA Disaster zones. As communities become fully restored with water and electricity, Airbnb will add more open properties.
For displaced residents of Lee and Charlotte counties, Airbnb is also working with their nonprofit partners to offer vouchers for temporary housing at Airbnb properties. To learn more about how the voucher program works, see Airbnb's full press release at https://news.airbnb.com/airbnb-org-hurricane-relief-efforts/.
Florida Department of Education (DOE)
All school districts impacted by Hurricane Ian have opened, less than three weeks after Hurricane Ian made landfall. More info can be found here.
Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
DEP is coordinating with FWC and USCG on derelict/displaced vessels.
DEP landfill strike team members along with EPA On-Scene Coordinator staff continue DDMS/Debris inspections.
301 Disaster Debris Management Sites have been authorized to operate for Hurricane Ian, including 70 in Lee, Charlotte and Sarasota counties. These sites are a critical component of expediting clean-up, reducing environmental and public health impacts, and meeting federal reimbursement requirements.
DEP staff are on the ground assessing water and wastewater infrastructure on some of the hardest hit areas Fort Myers Beach, Pine Island, Sanibel Island and Gasparilla Island, with resources from FlaWARN, US Army Corps of Engineers, local utilities and the Division of Emergency Management's contractor.
DEP is coordinating with FlaWARN and other response agencies on the dispatch of generators, fuel and pump trucks to assist drinking water and wastewater facilities to help get them operational as soon as possible.
Hazardous Area Response Teams have been deployed to aid with assessment and resources for addressing impacts to hazardous waste facilities in impacted areas.
Following the issuance of the Governor's Executive Order, DEP issued an Emergency Final Order waiving permitting requirements for the storage and processing of solid waste, including storm debris.
DEP has also issued an Emergency Final Order to expedite necessary repair, replacement and restoration of structures, equipment, surface water management systems, works and other systems damaged by the storm.
Licensing
DBPR Secretary Melanie S. Griffin is accompanying the Division of Regulation team in Charlotte County as they sweep neighborhoods assessing whether there is damage and looking for unlicensed contracting.
DOH's Board of Clinical Social Work, Marriage and Family Therapy, and Mental Health Counseling is increasing resources to expedite processing of licensure applications, ensuring greater availability of qualified mental health professionals.
DBPR Emergency Order 2022-04 waives the application fees associated with relocating or reopening certain businesses, including the addition of branch locations regulated by the Department or by any board, commission or division of the Department, where relocation or reopening arises from damages caused by Hurricane Ian in the listed counties.
DBPR Emergency Order 2022-03 waives the requirement for certified or registered, general, building, or residential contractors to subcontract roofing work for the repair or installation of any roof type in listed counties.
The emergency order clarifies that the installation of non-permanent, emergency tarps to relieve damage caused by Hurricane Ian fall within the exemptions listed in section 489.103(6).
Temporary Veterinarian License Application: The Florida Board of Veterinary Medicine has a 30-Day Temporary Veterinarian License available to out-of-state veterinarians who do not currently hold a Florida Veterinary License but wish to come to Florida to provide relief veterinary services.
Florida licensed veterinarians interested in offering volunteer services should contact the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Florida Vet Corp for information at 1-800-HELP-FLA (1-800-435-7352).
Food Industry Bulletins: DBPR has published Emergency Recovery Guidelines and Boil Water Notice Guidelines on our website, and DBPR's Division of Hotels and Restaurants is distributing the notices to licensed businesses in impacted areas.
DBPR Emergency Order 2022-01 extends the renewal deadline from September 30 or October 1, 2022, to October 31, 2022, for multiple licenses.
DBPR Emergency Order 2022-01 also extends the deadline for the filing of monthly reports and returns by certain alcoholic beverage and tobacco license holders from October 10, 2022, to October 31, 2022. Additionally, the order suspends and tolls through October 31, 2022, all final orders reflecting final agency action and all time requirements and deadlines for filing responses outlined in agency orders.
DBPR Board Meeting cancellations and other updates can be found at http://myfloridalicense.com/emergency.
DBPR's Division of Drugs, Devices and Cosmetics is coordinating with wholesale distributors of prescription drugs and medical gases to provide information and support relating to exceptions for the emergency distribution of these critical supplies where needed.
Insurance
OIR is requiring insurers to report preliminary catastrophe claims for Hurricane Ian. To date, insurers have reported a total of $ 6,182,943,188 in estimated insured losses and a total of 543,601 claims. This aggregate information is compiled from claims data filed by insurers, it has not been audited or independently verified. Additional claim data and information can be found on OIR's Hurricane Ian information page here.
On October 17, 2022, the Department of Revenue issued Emergency Order #22-003, extending certain filing due dates for Florida businesses located in counties impacted by Hurricane Ian. The order extends September 2022 and October 2022 reporting periods for sales and use tax, reemployment tax and several other tax types to November 23, 2022 for the six counties in southwest Florida where Hurricane Ian made landfall: Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Hardee, Lee, and Sarasota. Those businesses affected by this order or impacted by the storm who have questions regarding the order may contact Taxpayer Services at (850) 488-6800 or by email at GTAHurricaneHelp@Floridarevenue.com
OIR issued Emergency Order 300997-22-EO in response to Hurricane Ian regarding the extension of grace periods, limitations on cancellations and nonrenewals, deemers and limitations on "use and file" filings. This Emergency Order is issued to protect the public health, safety and welfare of all Florida policyholders.
OIR instituted a data call for the purpose of collecting catastrophe claims data related to Hurricane Ian. OIR is requiring daily catastrophe claims reporting for Hurricane Ian starting Friday, September 30 to assist with determining the impact of Hurricane Ian on Florida's insurance industry. More information regarding catastrophe claims data and reporting is available here.
Florida Main Street Program
The Florida Department of State, Division of Historical Resources', Florida Main Street Program has been in contact with Florida Main Street communities before and after Hurricane Ian to mitigate damage to the communities and historic properties in these communities.
Florida Main Street has dispersed information to communities including recovery resources, volunteer assistance, Small Business Association Loan opening and disaster assistance information in disaster declaration areas.
Additionally, The Florida Main Street Program has paired up communities that were affected by Hurricane Ian with mentors who were successful in rehabilitation after Hurricane Michael to provide pragmatic experience about ways to move forward and recover after disaster.
Elections Update
At the request of the Supervisors of Elections in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties, and at the recommendation of Secretary of State Cord Byrd, the Governor signed Executive Order 22-234, which will help ensure adequate access to Florida's 2022 General Election ballot for the voters of Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties.
The Governor's Executive Order includes provisions authorizing the Supervisors of Elections in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties to:
Extend the number of days for early voting and designate additional early voting locations. The early voting period may begin as early as Monday, October 24, 2022, and can extend through Election Day, November 8, 2022.
Allow voters in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties to request by phone that their vote-by-mail (VBM) ballot be mailed to an address other than their address of record. Voters must still provide an appropriate form of identification in the same manner as absent uniform service and overseas voters.
Designate and provide notice of the locations for secure ballot intake stations and relocate and consolidate polling locations as necessary.
Increase the pool of eligible poll workers who may serve within Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties by making eligible any poll workers previously trained for the 2020 election cycle and thereafter and by encouraging state employees to serve as poll workers in these counties.
Governor DeSantis also directed all state agencies to render aid and assistance as needed by the Supervisors of Elections in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties. Secretary Byrd and the Department of State assessed the need for these provisions based on extensive outreach to Florida's Supervisors of Elections:
Secretary Byrd and the Division of Elections leadership conducted continuous outreach and assessed the needs and readiness of counties in or around Hurricane Ian's path, including: Charlotte, Citrus, Collier, DeSoto, Dixie, Flagler, Gilchrist, Hardee, Hernando, Highlands, Hillsborough, Lafayette, Lake, Lee, Levy, Manatee, Orange, Osceola, Pasco, Pinellas, Polk, Putnam, Sarasota, Seminole, St. Johns, Taylor, and Volusia counties. Secretary Byrd also personally visited the hardest hit areas, including Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Lee, Hardee, and Sarasota counties to meet with their Supervisors of Elections in-person.
Furthermore, Secretary Byrd participated in discussions with the Florida Supervisors of Elections (FSE). The FSE is a nonprofit association representing the Supervisors of Elections from all of Florida's 67 counties.
Lastly, since Hurricane Ian made landfall, numerous Supervisors of Elections have publicly addressed their readiness, and thankfully most have very publicly stated that Ian's impacts will not interfere with their duties. This is a testament to the resiliency of Florida's elections system.
Office Closures
State facilities closed can be found at dms.myflorida.com/buildingclosures and the Florida DMS Emergency Information Hotline at 888-336-7345.
Search and Rescue
There have been 2,500 rescues made to date.
More than 1,000 team members performed search and rescue.
DCF has created a First Responder Support Line (407-823-1657) that all first responders throughout the impacted areas can contact. This line combines current resources into a single point of contact that will connect first responders with mental health professionals.
The State Disaster Recovery Mental Health Coordinator created a survey to assess the need for mental health services for Hurricane Ian first responders.
The Florida National Guard has cleared 51.5 miles to date in the impacted area. Guardsmen continue to assist law enforcement with roving patrols, security, traffic control and curfew enforcement missions.
###
Load-Date: October 20, 2022



End of Document


Boil water advisory in Beaver Book lifted
Standard-Speaker (Hazleton, Pennsylvania)
October 20, 2022 Thursday

Copyright 2022 The Standard-Speaker (Hazleton, Pa.)
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 80 words
Byline: Standard-Speaker, Hazleton, Pa.
Body




Oct. 20—A boil water advisory in the Beaver Brook section of Hazle Twp. has been lifted.
Beaver Brook and Kline Twp. testing results from Tuesday and Wednesday were negative for bacteria, according to Bob Quinn, Beaver Brook Association president.
— Staff report
Contact the writer: achristman@standardspeaker.com; 570-501-3584
___ (c)2022 the Standard-Speaker (Hazleton, Pa.) Visit the Standard-Speaker (Hazleton, Pa.) at standardspeaker.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.
Load-Date: October 21, 2022



End of Document


EPA investigates Mississippi's spending of federal funds before Jackson water crisis
NBCNEWS.com
October 20, 2022 Thursday 11:02 PM GMT

Copyright 2022 NBCNEWS.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 141 words
Byline: Bracey Harris
Body




Click to view full-text
https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/jackson-mississippi-water-crisis-epa-investigation-rcna53086
Click to view image
https://media-cldnry.s-nbcnews.com/image/upload/rockcms/2022-10/221019-Mississippi-water-crisis-ac-901p-abb4fe.jpg
Rogelio V. Solis
Volunteers distribute cases of water at a community/fraternal drive-thru water distribution site in Jackson, Miss., Sept. 7, 2022. A boil-water advisory has been lifted for Mississippi's capital, and the state will stop handing out free bottled water on Saturday. But the crisis isn't over. Water pressure still hasn't been fully restored in Jackson, and some residents say their tap water still comes out looking dirty and smelling like sewage.
Volunteers distribute cases of water at a community/fraternal drive-thru water distribution site in Jackson, Miss., on Sept. 7, 2022.
Load-Date: October 21, 2022



End of Document


100M HEADED TO DETROIT TO REPLACE LEAD SERVICE LINES OVER NEXT THREE YEARS; MORE FUNDING ON THE WAY
States News Service
October 20, 2022 Thursday

Copyright 2022 States News Service
Length: 1832 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: DETROIT, MI 
Body




The following information was released by the City of Detroit:
POSTED BY Water and Sewerage Department
$100M headed to Detroit to replace lead service lines over next three years; more funding on the way
DWSD to accelerate existing lead service line replacement program that began in 2018
Funding will allow for at least 5,000 lead lines to be replaced annually
Contractor equity and capacity building in progress
DETROIT - Thanks to recently awarded state and federal grants, the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department (DWSD) now has amassed a $100 million fund that will allow it to dramatically speed up the replacement of its estimated 80,000 lead services lines in the city at no additional cost to its customers, DWSD Director Gary Brown announced today.
Lead service lines are what carry treated water from the public water main to the house. The Michigan Lead and Copper Rule, the most stringent in America, requires all lead service lines to be replaced over the next 20 years. Detroit houses built before 1945 likely have a lead service line unless the pipe was replaced in recent years.
"Annual testing shows the water leaving the treatment plants is well within state and federal safety guidelines," Brown said. "While there is no evidence to suggest lead service lines are a contributor to elevated blood lead levels in Detroit, they do pose a risk. As part of DWSD's commitment to safe drinking water, we will eventually replace all residential lead service lines in our city."
Brown said that the influx of funding means DWSD will be able to ramp up its current program from 700 replacements per year to at least 5,000. Currently DWSD replaces lead service lines while on the same street replacing the water main. The additional funding will enable the utility to replace individual service lines outside of DWSD's capital improvement program.
The cost of residential lead service line replacement, which requires excavation at the curbstop valve and uses the boring method to install the new line to the home, can be more than $10,000 per house due to inflation. The $100 million fund is expected to be able to replace service lines at a rate of about 5,000 per year over the next three years. Brown said DWSD will use predictive modeling, confirmed service line data, and residents who place their home on the wait list to cluster replacements by council district to make efficient use of the dollars.
The $100M for Detroit's Lead Service Line Replacement Program is as follows:
$75M American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) funds through Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes and Energy (EGLE)
$10M Michigan Drinking Water State Revolving Funds (DWSRF)
$5M Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) WIIN grant
$10M DWSD Capital Improvement Program
Brown said that much more revenue will be needed to replace all the estimated 80,000 lead service lines in Detroit and his staff is currently pursuing additional funding sources.
"With an existing and robust lead service line replacement program, we have the ability to dramatically accelerate our work based with this new funding," said Gary Brown, DWSD director. "We thank our federal and state partners for providing the bulk of the funding. We've said for the past four years, we cannot put the cost on the backs of our ratepayers outside funding is essential to replace the lines."
While on the street replacing the water main, DWSD has 100% compliance with residents or adult occupants allowing it to replace the full lead service line since access to the home is required. This is largely due to a comprehensive community outreach effort that begins at least 40 days in advance of construction.
How it works - Detroit's Lead Service Line Replacement Program
In 2018, prior to the revised Michigan Lead and Copper Rule, DWSD began replacing lead service lines as part of its capital improvement program when on the same street replacing the water main. Extensive outreach, including neighborhood meetings and information packets, to the owner/occupant is done prior to construction.
The city is responsible for the existing portion of the service line from the public water main to the curbstop (turn-on/off valve typically in the front yard). The property owner is responsible for the service line from the curbstop to inside the house. Prior to a service line replacement, contractors excavate the curbstop to visually verify the pipe material. Lead and galvanized pipes are replaced with copper.
When a lead service line is verified, DWSD gets owner or adult occupant permission (including tenant) to replace the full lead service line, including the private portion and get access to connect it to the home plumbing through the water meter. DWSD warranties the work for one year before the property owner resumes ownership of their portion. Under this program, there is no cost to the property owner to have the pipe replaced.
Addressing contractor capacity and equity
To increase contractor capacity and equity, and utilize the $100 million for lead service line replacement, DWSD has been actively engaging with potential contractors across the city, state and even surrounding states to support this goal. And, the department will continue to ensure contractors comply with Mayor Duggan's Executive Order on 51% of the hours worked need to be Detroit residents.
DWSD's Opportunity and Inclusion Director Tiffany Jones looked at contractors that have already completed work on similar programs, including Benton Harbor, Eastpointe, and the City of Detroit Basement Backup Protection Program. So far, she organized 10 meetings, representing 28 organizations. The meetings provide an overview, including the procurement process, and allow the opportunity for contractors to ask questions.
DWSD has committed to breaking up the bids in various amounts to allow for smaller contractors to be the primary bidder.
Extensive community outreach
A nine-page information packet with a folder was created specific to the Detroit lead service line replacement program that has a notice, frequently asked questions, flushing information and homeowner/occupant agreement to authorize replacement of the private portion of the lead service line. Extensive community outreach and education are done to ensure residents are aware of the program and know the process from start to finish. The packets are hand delivered to the house, not mailed.
Community meetings in advance of construction are held in a nearby median, vacant lot, church, or virtually.
A pitcher filter and cartridge are also delivered to all houses on the street of the water main replacement as a precautionary measure, and for individual lead service line replacement. This action was initiated in 2017 after the Flint water crisis. Pitcher filters were chosen since homes have different faucet fixtures. The filters are the type that are designed for lead reduction.
The facts about lead in drinking water
The water leaving Detroit water treatment plants, operated by the Great Lakes Water Authority (GLWA), does not contain lead, but lead can be released into drinking water from lead service lines and home plumbing as the water moves from the water mains to your tap. Beginning in 1945, Detroit stopped allowing the installation of lead piping for water service lines. Homes before 1945 are most likely to have a lead pipe that connects the home to the water main, known as a lead service line. The lead in lead service lines, household plumbing and fixtures can dissolve or break off into water and end up in tap water. The water provided to DWSD customers contains a corrosion inhibitor to reduce leaching from lead service lines and other lead components, but lead can still be present in water at the tap.
"We know that the number one source of lead poisoning in children is decaying paint and dust in homes that were constructed prior to 1978," said Chief Public Health Officer Denise Fair Razo." The Detroit Health Department can help, with education on how to reduce lead exposure in homes, and referrals to get children tested. If anyone has any concerns regarding lead exposure inside their home, I encourage you to request a lead test from your child's primary healthcare provider or contact the Detroit Health Department."
Steps to reduce exposure to lead in your water
Run your water to flush out lead. The more time water has been sitting in your home's pipes, the more lead it may contain. Therefore, if your water has not been used for several hours, run the water before using it for drinking or cooking. This flushes lead-containing water from the pipes. If you do not have a lead service line, run the water for 30 seconds to two minutes, or until it becomes cold or reaches a steady temperature. If you do have a lead service line, run the water for at least five minutes to flush water from both the interior building plumbing and the lead service line.
Use only cold water for drinking and cooking. Do not cook with or drink water from the hot water tap; lead dissolves more easily into hot water.
Use only filtered water or bottled water for preparing baby formula.
Do not boil water to remove lead. Boiling water will not reduce lead levels. In the event DWSD issues a boil water advisory due to low water pressure (such as caused by a large water main break), water users in the designated advisory area will be advised to boil water before using for cooking, drinking and brushing your teeth. Residents with lead service lines should only boil filtered water not water directly from the tap.
Consider using a filter to reduce lead in drinking water. The Detroit Health Department recommends that any household with a child or pregnant woman use a certified lead filter to reduce lead from their drinking water. Look for filters that are tested and certified to NSF/ANSI Standard 53 for lead reduction.
Some filter options include a pour-through pitcher or faucet-mount systems. If the label does not specifically mention lead reduction, check the Performance Data Sheet included with the device. Be sure to maintain and replace the filter device in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions to protect water quality.
Get your child tested. Contact the Detroit Health Department at 313-876-0133 or your healthcare provider to find out how you can get your child tested for lead if you are concerned about exposure.
Identify older plumbing fixtures that likely contain lead. Older faucets, fittings, and valves sold before 2014 may contain higher levels of lead, even if marked "lead-free." Faucets, fittings, and valves sold after January 2014 are required to meet a more restrictive "lead-free" definition but may still contain up to 0.25 percent lead. When purchasing new plumbing materials, it is important to look for materials that are certified to meet NSF standard 61.
Clean your aerator. The aerator on the end of your faucet is a screen that will catch debris. This debris could include particulate lead. The aerator should be removed monthly to rinse out any debris.
Load-Date: October 20, 2022



End of Document


$100M HEADED TO DETROIT TO REPLACE LEAD SERVICE LINES OVER NEXT THREE YEARS; MORE FUNDING ON THE WAY
US State News
October 20, 2022 Thursday 9:32 AM  EST

Copyright 2022 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 2030 words
Body




DETROIT, Mich., Oct. 20 -- The city of Detroit issued the following news release:
$100M headed to Detroit to replace lead service lines over next three years; more funding on the way
* DWSD to accelerate existing lead service line replacement program that began in 2018
* Funding will allow for at least 5,000 lead lines to be replaced annually
* Contractor equity and capacity building in progress
DETROIT -Thanks to recently awarded state and federal grants, the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department (DWSD) now has amassed a $100 million fund that will allow it to dramatically speed up the replacement of its estimated 80,000 lead services lines in the city - at no additional cost to its customers, DWSD Director Gary Brown announced today.
Lead service lines are what carry treated water from the public water main to the house. The Michigan Lead & Copper Rule, the most stringent in America, requires all lead service lines to be replaced over the next 20 years. Detroit houses built before 1945 likely have a lead service line unless the pipe was replaced in recent years.
"Annual testing shows the water leaving the treatment plants is well within state and federal safety guidelines," Brown said. "While there is no evidence to suggest lead service lines are a contributor to elevated blood lead levels in Detroit, they do pose a risk. As part of DWSD's commitment to safe drinking water, we will eventually replace all residential lead service lines in our city."
Brown said that the influx of funding means DWSD will be able to ramp up its current program from 700 replacements per year to at least 5,000. Currently DWSD replaces lead service lines while on the same street replacing the water main. The additional funding will enable the utility to replace individual service lines outside of DWSD's capital improvement program.
The cost of residential lead service line replacement, which requires excavation at the curbstop valve and uses the boring method to install the new line to the home, can be more than $10,000 per house due to inflation. The $100 million fund is expected to be able to replace service lines at a rate of about 5,000 per year over the next three years. Brown said DWSD will use predictive modeling, confirmed service line data, and residents who place their home on the wait list to cluster replacements by council district to make efficient use of the dollars.
The $100M for Detroit's Lead Service Line Replacement Program is as follows:
* $75M American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) funds through Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes and Energy (EGLE)
* $10M Michigan Drinking Water State Revolving Funds (DWSRF)
* $5M Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) WIIN grant
* $10M DWSD Capital Improvement Program
Brown said that much more revenue will be needed to replace all the estimated 80,000 lead service lines in Detroit and his staff is currently pursuing additional funding sources.
"With an existing and robust lead service line replacement program, we have the ability to dramatically accelerate our work based with this new funding," said Gary Brown, DWSD director. "We thank our federal and state partners for providing the bulk of the funding. We've said for the past four years, we cannot put the cost on the backs of our ratepayers - outside funding is essential to replace the lines."
While on the street replacing the water main, DWSD has 100% compliance with residents or adult occupants allowing it to replace the full lead service line since access to the home is required. This is largely due to a comprehensive community outreach effort that begins at least 40 days in advance of construction.
REPORTERS/EDITORS/PRODUCERS:
DWSD has footage from a press confererence with EGLE announcing the funding as well as talking about and showing the lead service line replacement program in Detroit:https://dwsd.box.com/s/dd2npentkj222u59pu638m1qwc4cg19b. Photos are also available.
How it works - Detroit's Lead Service Line Replacement Program
In 2018, prior to the revised Michigan Lead and Copper Rule, DWSD began replacing lead service lines as part of its capital improvement program when on the same street replacing the water main. Extensive outreach, including neighborhood meetings and information packets, to the owner/occupant is done prior to construction.
The city is responsible for the existing portion of the service line from the public water main to the curbstop (turn-on/off valve typically in the front yard). The property owner is responsible for the service line from the curbstop to inside the house. Prior to a service line replacement, contractors excavate the curbstop to visually verify the pipe material. Lead and galvanized pipes are replaced with copper.
When a lead service line is verified, DWSD gets owner or adult occupant permission (including tenant) to replace the full lead service line, including the private portion and get access to connect it to the home plumbing through the water meter. DWSD warranties the work for one year before the property owner resumes ownership of their portion. Under this program, there is no cost to the property owner to have the pipe replaced.
The DWSD lead service line replacement program is featured in thisvideo.
Residents are encouraged to watch thisvideoto determine if you have a lead service line and put yourself on a wait list for replacement athttps://detroitmi.gov/lslr.
Addressing contractor capacity and equity
To increase contractor capacity and equity, and utilize the $100 million for lead service line replacement, DWSD has been actively engaging with potential contractors across the city, state and even surrounding states to support this goal. And, the department will continue to ensure contractors comply with Mayor Duggan's Executive Order on 51% of the hours worked need to be Detroit residents.
DWSD's Opportunity and Inclusion Director Tiffany Jones looked at contractors that have already completed work on similar programs, including Benton Harbor, Eastpointe, and the City of Detroit Basement Backup Protection Program. So far, she organized 10 meetings, representing 28 organizations. The meetings provide an overview, including the procurement process, and allow the opportunity for contractors to ask questions.
DWSD has committed to breaking up the bids in various amounts to allow for smaller contractors to be the primary bidder. The bids will be posted in the next few weeks onhttps://mitn.info/.
Extensive community outreach
A nine-page information packet with a folder was created specific to the Detroit lead service line replacement program that has a notice, frequently asked questions, flushing information and homeowner/occupant agreement to authorize replacement of the private portion of the lead service line. Extensive community outreach and education are done to ensure residents are aware of the program and know the process from start to finish. The packets are hand delivered to the house, not mailed.
Community meetings in advance of construction are held in a nearby median, vacant lot, church, or virtually.
A pitcher filter and cartridge are also delivered to all houses on the street of the water main replacement as a precautionary measure, and for individual lead service line replacement. This action was initiated in 2017 after the Flint water crisis. Pitcher filters were chosen since homes have different faucet fixtures. The filters are the type that are designed for lead reduction.
The facts about lead in drinking water
The water leaving Detroit water treatment plants, operated by the Great Lakes Water Authority (GLWA), does not contain lead, but lead can be released into drinking water from lead service lines and home plumbing as the water moves from the water mains to your tap. Beginning in 1945, Detroit stopped allowing the installation of lead piping for water service lines. Homes before 1945 are most likely to have a lead pipe that connects the home to the water main, known as a lead service line. The lead in lead service lines, household plumbing and fixtures can dissolve or break off into water and end up in tap water. The water provided to DWSD customers contains a corrosion inhibitor to reduce leaching from lead service lines and other lead components, but lead can still be present in water at the tap.
"We know that the number one source of lead poisoning in children is decaying paint and dust in homes that were constructed prior to 1978," said Chief Public Health Officer Denise Fair Razo." The Detroit Health Department can help, with education on how to reduce lead exposure in homes, and referrals to get children tested. If anyone has any concerns regarding lead exposure inside their home, I encourage you to request a lead test from your child's primary healthcare provider or contact the Detroit Health Department."
Steps to reduce exposure to lead in your water
* Run your water to flush out lead. The more time water has been sitting in your home's pipes, the more lead it may contain. Therefore, if your water has not been used for several hours, run the water before using it for drinking or cooking. This flushes lead-containing water from the pipes. If youdo nothave a lead service line, run the water for 30 seconds to two minutes, or until it becomes cold or reaches a steady temperature. If youdohave a lead service line, run the water for at least five minutes to flush water from both the interior building plumbing and the lead service line.
* Use only cold water for drinking and cooking.Donotcook with or drink water from the hot water tap; lead dissolves more easily into hot water.
* Use only filtered water or bottled water for preparing baby formula.
* Do not boil water to remove lead.Boiling water will not reduce lead levels. In the event DWSD issues a boil water advisory due to low water pressure (such as caused by a large water main break), water users in the designated advisory area will be advised to boil water before using for cooking, drinking and brushing your teeth. Residents with lead service lines shouldonlyboilfiltered water- not water directly from the tap.
* Consider using a filter to reduce lead in drinking water.The Detroit Health Department recommends that any household with a child or pregnant woman use a certified lead filter to reduce lead from their drinking water. Look for filters that are tested and certified to NSF/ANSI Standard 53 for lead reduction.
Some filter options include a pour-through pitcher or faucet-mount systems. If the label does not specifically mention lead reduction, check the Performance Data Sheet included with the device. Be sure to maintain and replace the filter device in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions to protect water quality.
* Get your child tested.Contact the Detroit Health Department at 313-876-0133 or your healthcare provider to find out how you can get your child tested for lead if you are concerned about exposure.
* Identify older plumbing fixtures that likely contain lead.Older faucets, fittings, and valves sold before 2014 may contain higher levels of lead, even if marked "lead-free." Faucets, fittings, and valves sold after January 2014 are required to meet a more restrictive "lead-free" definition but may still contain up to 0.25 percent lead. When purchasing new plumbing materials, it is important to look for materials that are certified to meet NSF standard 61.
* Clean your aerator.The aerator on the end of your faucet is a screen that will catch debris. This debris could include particulate lead. The aerator should be removed monthly to rinse out any debris.
* Test your water for lead.To request for your water to be tested, please visitdetroitmi.gov/leadsafeand search "lead and copper sample request form." If you do not have Internet access, please call the Detroit Lead Safe Resource Line at 313-267-8000 and press option 7 for further assistance.
* Add your home to the DWSD Lead Service Line Replacement Program wait listonce you visually verify you have a lead pipe coming into your home from the water main. Go todetroitmi.gov/lslr. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
Load-Date: October 21, 2022



End of Document


Road to climate gains could be a rocky one; Promised progress may come, but some experts see cracks in more ambitious goals
USA Today
October 20, 2022 Thursday
1 Edition

Copyright 2022 USA Today All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 2660 words
Byline: By, Kyle Bagenstose, USA TODAY
Body




When President Joe Biden signed the $1.2 trillion Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act last November - commonly known as the bipartisan infrastructure bill - he and other proponents noted it would be the largest investment in infrastructure in a generation.
But they also promised it would be something else: a historic effort to tackle climate change. Although it didn't devote hundreds of billions of dollars directly to the climate fight as the Inflation Reduction Act did this year, the administration said the infrastructure bill would help transition the nation to cleaner sources of energy while electrifying the transportation sector and preparing roads and bridges for a changing world.
"President Biden's Bipartisan Infrastructure Deal passed by Congress will strengthen our nation's resilience to extreme weather and climate change while reducing greenhouse gas emissions, expanding access to clean drinking water, building up a clean power grid, and more,"  the White House asserted in November 2021.
Promises were numerous:
Roads and bridges: $110 billion to "repair and rebuild our roads and bridges with a focus on climate change mitigation, resilience, equity, and safety."
More public transit: $105 billion for public transit and rail, which would "eliminate the Amtrak maintenance backlog" and otherwise cut  greenhouse gas emissions from the transportation sector by electrifying public transit.
Better grid: $65 billion for "the largest investment in clean energy transmission and the electric grid in American history."
Cleaner water: $15 billion to "replace all of the nation's lead pipes and service lines" and about $35 billion more to further upgrade drinking and wastewater infrastructure.
EV chargers: $7.5 billion to "build out the first-ever national network of EV chargers in the United States."
Experts say that as funding from the law begins to roll out, Americans will soon see upgrades like electric school buses, followed by a growing network of electric vehicle charging stations. But they also warn that funding from the bill probably won't result in dramatic changes in the way Americans and electricity move throughout the country, limiting the overall climate impact.
USA TODAY spoke to a variety of climate and transportation experts to look more closely at whether the bill's promises are meeting reality.
Transportation transformation?
Though experts said it's too early to fully judge the bill on its climate merits - spending will primarily be portioned out over five or 10 years - many agreed on two conclusions.
First, the bill is indeed historic in its commitment of money  and focus on climate. Experts said that in most cases the Biden administration is working diligently to ensure a good rollout. Among other measures, the U.S. Department of Transportation is crafting a new regulation to pair about $27 billion in funding with an effort for states to track and lower greenhouse emissions from transportation.
But others say that because of continued prioritization of roads and cars and a lack of accountability at the state level, they don't expect the bill to revolutionize the transportation or energy sectors, which together account for more than half of U.S. greenhouse gas emissions.
"Most Americans do not have access to transit or certainly not good transit," said Beth Osborne, director of the national nonprofit Transportation for America. "We have a lot of work to do."
Much of the past year was spent simply laying the groundwork for awarding the funding. Money will start to roll out this fall or early next year.
Experts say administration officials have moved swiftly to set funding stipulations that meet many climate and policy groups' wish lists. Most feel the administration is doing about all it can to ensure climate change remains a priority once money is awarded to states and cities, which will actually do the spending.
"There's still a lot to do, but they've made a lot of progress since the law was enacted," said Deron Lovaas, a senior policy  adviser with the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC), a Washington, D.C.-based nonprofit.
But experts warn the devil's in the details, and many won't be revealed until further down the line.
Early rollouts, mixed results
Of projects that have had early rollouts, results are mixed.
On one end of the spectrum, cities and schools are clamoring for money for electric school buses, generating a buzz of excitement about a rapid transition in the years ahead.
Money to replace lead service lines sits on the other side of the ledger. Experts have noted that the allocated $15billion doesn't nearly match the actual cost of replacing every lead drinking water pipe across the country.
With the first year of state-by-state funding for lead service line replacements already set in stone,  lawmakers in states like New Jersey are decrying a formula they say unfairly awards more money to some states. Because the formula was based on overall infrastructure needs instead of the number of actual lead service lines, an NRDC analysis found states like Ohio and New Jersey  get only about $100 per lead pipe, while Hawaii receives $10,000.
"It is shocking that the reported plan for the distribution of these funds gives some states thousands of dollars per pipe ... while the most impacted states are left to bear almost the entire cost of replacement themselves," New Jersey state senators Troy Singleton and Linda Greenstein wrote in a letter to the Environmental Protection Agency.
The EPA says it is working to fix its funding formula, but the problem points to  a wider truth, experts say: The bill's money is not going to fully address the nation's infrastructure and environmental challenges.
Cars are still king
Kevin DeGood, director of infrastructure policy at the nonprofit Center for American Progress, noted that the lion's share of the bill's new spending - $110billion - is earmarked for traditional infrastructure like roads and bridges.
That, in itself, can be problematic. For much of the past century, America's spending on transportation has revolved around the automobile, with interstate highway systems feasting as public transportation systems like trains and subways starved. Because cars and trucks emit large quantities of carbon dioxide, that legacy has now made transportation the largest emitter of greenhouse gases of any sector in the U.S. economy.
"So many people are locked into driving, because that's the only thing we built for," DeGood said.
That the bill continues to spend heavily on roadways signals that the automobile still reigns supreme. Further complicating the matter, DeGood said, is that the $110 billion in additional road and bridge funding is largely distributed to 52  state Department of Transportation agencies, including those in Washington, D.C., and Puerto Rico.
Those agencies have some flexibility in how they use the money,  including for public transportation. But DeGood says that historically such departments have focused on cars by expanding roadways and building new ones and that there is little to suggest this time will be different.
When state DOT administrators "wake up in the morning," DeGood said, "they think in terms of congestion and road widening."
The first year of boosted road and bridge funding has already rolled out the door, and oversight on how much is actually going to climate-friendly projects is difficult because of the slushiness of state budgets, DeGood said.
Progress on EV charging network
Reliance on the automobile can be less problematic if cars and trucks on the road are running on  electricity.
Max Baumhefner, a senior attorney with the NRDC who watches the electric vehicle space, said there's mostly good news on the effort to build out a  nationwide network of charging stations.
Although he says it will be a year or two before Americans see chargers physically installed, he adds the U.S. Department of Transportation worked swiftly to launch a National Electric Vehicle Infrastructure program, which will divvy up the $5 billion set aside for electric vehicle charging stations.
Just three months after the bill passed, the program released  guidelines for states to apply for the money. Baumhefner approves of the criteria, which he says emphasizes the installation of the latest generation of fast-charging stations located strategically along heavily traveled highways.
"Fast charging is getting a lot faster," Baumhefner said. "We're seeing a move toward charging that gets you back on the road after a cup of coffee and a bathroom break, where before it was more like stopping for lunch."
Another $2.5 billion is earmarked for a separate community grant program that Baumhefner predicts will mostly be used to build out local charging stations. The Inflation Reduction Act passed this summer offers further billions to complement charging station development.
But Baumhefner warns of a downside: Estimates show the U.S. probably will need to spend at least $40 billion on public EV charging stations just to meet its 2030 climate goals. And that doesn't include what it will cost to charge medium- and heavy-duty vehicles like tractor trailers or hit even larger 2050 targets.
"The bottom line is that it's a historic investment, but it's not alone sufficient," Baumhefner said.
Public transit, rail fall short
Osborne, with Transportation for America, says it's a similar story for public transportation and railways.
The bill allocated more money than ever for public transportation, which she says will largely address much-needed maintenance backlogs in cities and towns across the country. Although much of the money has yet to be used, Americans can expect to see lots of minor improvements in the years ahead: faster subways and trolleys as rail lines are repaired, older train cars and buses replaced with nicer new ones, and more frequent service.
Amtrak received a particularly big boost,  a nearly ninefold increase in funding from the last major transportation bill in 2015.
And perhaps the most visible transformation to Americans will be school buses. The infrastructure bill devoted $5 billion to replacing gas-powered school buses nationwide with ones running on electricity or other zero-emission fuels. In September, the EPA announced it was nearly doubling the amount of first-year funding, from $500 to $965 million, after school districts bombarded it with applications.
The agency expects to release  a list of awardees this month.
"We're working across all 50 states to accelerate the transition to a future where clean, zero-emissions school buses are the American standard," EPA Administrator Michael Regan said in a statement.
But Osborne says there are still a lot of question marks on public transportation. A simple boost in funding isn't enough on its own, she says, noting that federal and state officials still need to build out programs to  use the money. Often, such efforts can get bogged down by politics and special interests.
In one particularly thorny example, Osborne says,  Amtrak wants to upgrade passenger service along the Gulf Coast on railways owned by CSX, a private company. But she says CSX has largely rebuffed the efforts based on cost claims, and the matter is now before a federal review board. How aggressively the administration approaches the dispute could foretell how serious it is about public transit.
"There is a failure to regulate and manage the rail owners according to the law," Osborne said. "The administration has to get that straight."
And even if policies ultimately complement the funding, Osborne says, results are still mitigated by the fact that the car remains king. There's more money than ever for rail and public transit, but the same is true for roads and highways. With the latter still getting about 80% of the pie, Osborne has serious doubts on how far the needle will move in the effort to lower greenhouse gas emissions.
"It's almost entirely status quo," Osborne said. "If we really want to make a big difference on climate and equity ... we need to build tons and tons more public transit."
Long way to go for power grid
Experts say the country also needs to build vast amounts of new high-power transmission lines to support the shift to renewables and cut emissions from the energy sector, the second-largest emitter of greenhouse gases after transportation.
Rob Gramlich, president of power sector consulting firm Grid Strategies LLC, says such lines are essential to ensuring wind, solar and other green energy sources can travel vast distances to population centers. Demand for renewable energy generation is growing, as it is for electric cars and devices. But transmission lines linking the two are falling far behind.
"What that tells you is this going to be the big issue of the next few years," Gramlich said.
On paper, the infrastructure bill devoted $81 billion to the energy grid and power sector, the second-biggest pot of money after roads and bridges. In promoting the bill, the White House promised "thousands of miles of new, resilient transmission lines to facilitate the expansion of renewable energy."
But, Gramlich said, the bill provided very little funding for the actual construction of such transmission lines. Most of the power and grid money made available under the law is broken into a diverse constellation of small programs, from carbon capture infrastructure to blackout prevention to nuclear energy.
A program to fund high-voltage power lines, the Transmission Facilitation Program, received just $2.5 billion and operates on a loan basis. "That's about one month's worth of transmission spending in the country," Gramlich said. "It's marginally helpful but a far cry from anything transformative."
The thirst for water
In addition to climate change, the infrastructure bill promised to address another pressing human and environmental priority: water.
The American Society of Civil Engineers gives U.S. wastewater infrastructure a D-plus, with drinking water fairing only slightly better at a C-plus. A recent systemwide collapse that put more than 150,000 residents of Jackson, Mississippi, under a boil-water advisory highlighted the harm that can come from neglect.
The infrastructure bill promised to address such problems. It pumped about $50 billion into the water sector, about a fivefold increase over prior funding levels.
That's welcome news in cities such as El Paso, Texas, where a fresh infusion of $20 million from the bill will help pay for an advanced water recycling facility set to begin construction next year, bringing a sustainable water source to the drought-stricken city.
But advocates say that while funding in the bill is transformative for some such cities, the money will fall short across the entire country.
"I do wish people would stop calling it a once-in-a-generation bill," said Becky Hammer, deputy director of federal water policy at NRDC. "Because we need more investment this generation."
Erik Olson, a senior strategist at NRDC, said that spread over five years, new money in the bill for water infrastructure comes out to about $10 billion annually. That's a significant boost over regular funding levels, which average less than $3 billion. But with some estimates calling for more than $1 trillion to fully address the nation's water problems, that means it could still take centuries to clear a national backlog unless Congress continues to significantly increase funding.
As with money for transportation, the bill's water funding also flows through state agencies, which are subject to their own whims and often award money to politically connected and wealthy communities. Olson points to reporting around Jackson, which indicates state officials historically steered money away from the majority-Black city, to highlight the problem.
"Unless EPA and states can figure out a way around ... it's going to remain challenging to make sure this money goes to communities that need it most."
Contributing: Martha Pskowski, El Paso Times
Graphic



 
Clockwise from top left: Ellen O'Nan/The Paducah Sun via AP; PATRICK T. FALLON/AFP via Getty Images; GREG LOVETT/USA TODAY NETWORK; Nick King/USA TODAY NETWORK; Jon Austria/USA TODAY NETWORK; Ronald W. Erdrich/USA TODAY Network
Load-Date: October 20, 2022



End of Document


EPA launches federal civil rights investigation over Jackson water crisis
CNN Wire
October 21, 2022 Friday 00:47Invalid date found for VDI: h0ee9950427a1a9e189e9ff3936785bd1 XCEDOCID: 4 LNI: 66NK-CCR1-DY7V-G0CH-00000-00. Date output 'as-is'.GMT

Copyright 2022 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved
Length: 619 words
Byline: By Andi Babineau and Ella Nilsen, CNN
Dateline: (CNN) 
Body




             The Environmental Protection Agency has opened a federal civil rights investigation into the state of Mississippi over the Jackson water crisis.
On Thursday, in response to complaints filed by the NAACP and Jackson residents, the EPA announced it will investigate whether the Mississippi Department of Health and the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality "discriminated against the majority Black population of the City of Jackson on the basis of race in the funding of water infrastructure and treatment programs and activities," the announcement said.
An official with the US Environmental Protection Agency told CNN the two state agencies have acknowledged receiving the EPA's letter on the probe. The official said the investigation should wrap up within about four months.
An EPA spokesperson told CNN Friday should the EPA find wrongdoing, it has the power to withhold federal funds from the state of Mississippi but would be careful not to deprive Jackson of funds needed to ensure safe and reliable drinking water.
The spokesperson also said the EPA is prepared to refer the case to the US Department of Justice should the two state agencies fail to cooperate with the investigation.
The NAACP praised the EPA's action.
"Today's decision by the EPA is a significant first step in holding the state accountable for its role in exacerbating the Jackson water crisis," said NAACP Environmental and Climate Justice Director Abre Conner. "For far too long, residents of Jackson, like Black communities across this country, have had water access weaponized against them."
The city of roughly 150,000 residents is 83% Black.
Neither the agencies nor the office of Mississippi Governor Tate Reeves have responded to CNN's request for comment since Thursday's announcement.
The water crisis got so bad for several months this year the National Guard was dispatched to help distribute bottled water around the city, which is Mississippi's capital.
Resident Virginia Evans told CNN recently the water problems have been so troubling she remains afraid to drink or cook with itdespite state officials lifting a more-than 40-day boil-water notice last month and declaring the water safe.
In the past six months, sometimes her toilets wouldn't flush or the water coming out the faucets at her home was brown and had low pressure, she said.
The city has long faced issues with its water system. Residents and activists point to years of systemic neglect as one of the main drivers. Some city leaders have blamed the state for not answering their calls for assistance with upgrading the decrepit water system.
According to the most recent data from the Mississippi Emergency Management Agency, the state's water crisis bill for the year has reached $12.6 million. Bottled water for distribution events accounts for about 25% of that amount.
The EPA has pressed the city for improvements for years, and in September, the US Justice Department, on behalf of the environmental agency, asked the city to "engage in immediate negotiations related to the City's recent drinking water crisis," according to a letter obtained by CNN affiliate WAPT. Officials from both agencies met with the mayor, the Justice Department told CNN last month in a statement.
It was no invitation for polite chitchat, as the highest law enforcement office in the land warned it was prepared to file a lawsuit under the federal Safe Drinking Water Act, which charges the EPA with setting and enforcing baseline health standards for tap water.         
             CNN's Steve Almasy, Nicquel Terry Ellis and Eliott C. McLaughlin contributed to this report.         
TM & © 2022 Cable News Network, Inc., a Time Warner Company. All rights reserved.
Load-Date: October 21, 2022



End of Document


How AI could help translate extreme weather alerts
Newstex Blogs 
Axios
October 21, 2022 Friday 2:20 PM EST

Copyright 2022 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 771 words
Byline: Ayurella Horn-Muller
Body




Oct 21, 2022( Axios: http://axios.com Delivered by Newstex)  
 A startup that provides AI-powered translation is working with the National Weather Service to improve language translations of extreme weather alerts across the U.S.  
The big picture: Gaps in language access to emergency alerts during extreme weather events have led to missed evacuations, injuries and loss of life for non-English speakers. Machine learning could mitigate that.  
Driving the news: AI-translation service Lilt has recently started working on a pilot project with the weather service to help produce more comprehensive weather warnings.  
How it works: Incorporating a mix of software and human translators, the service learns from linguists in real time using a neural network[1], or a computer system modeled loosely on the brain — which gets smarter with each use. The team behind Lilt, which earlier this year raised a $55 million[2] Series C, markets its speed of translation at the rate of at least three times the speed of other translation services, while also picking up slang and regional dialects. The software gets used by human forecasters at the NWS forecasting office, with the AI engine suggesting translation for the translators to work with, while actively storing all of their input. What they're saying: Phil Stiefel, solutions lead at Lilt, told Axios there is a longstanding need for better translation at the weather service. "If there's a translation error in a translated weather report, and somebody takes the wrong action based on that missed translation, then somebody could get hurt or even killed because of that," Stiefel told Axios. According to data[3] by the Migration Policy Institute, in 2019, 22% of U.S. residents over the age of five spoke a language other than English at home. The backstory: Past translation problems during floods, wildfires and tornadoes point to a legacy of language barriers within federal, state and local emergency weather alerting systems. In 2017, nearly all of the people in New York City to die from flash flooding from the remnants of Hurricane Ida were Asian and spoke limited English or Spanish, which the New York Times reported[4] may have led to those residents not receiving warnings to evacuate. Seven members of a Guatemalan family in Oklahoma died from flash floods in 2013 after leaving their home to seek shelter in a storm drain upon hearing a tornado warning. NBC News reported[5] "they hadn't heard or understood there had also been storm and flood warnings." And a 2020 study[6] found that emergency warnings during California's 2017-18 Thomas Fire were initially only available in English. As a result, Latino residents living in the two most heavily impacted counties missed information about evacuation areas, road closures, unsafe air and boil water notices. The intrigue: This isn't the only way the NWS is working to improve translation issues in the alert system. A 2021 research article[7] published in the American Meteorological Society looked at issues in English-to-Spanish translation of weather alerts that didn't account for dialects, which led to "inconsistent risk messaging," in Spanish-language alerts. The NWS/NOAA has since updated the language it uses in hazardous weather communication, adopting "dialect-neutral"[5] terminology suggested by the study authors, as reported by Noticias Telemundo. The bottom line: Monica Bozeman, the automated language translation lead at the NWS Office of Central Processing, told Axios in an email that the agency has developed experimental pilot projects looking to introduce automation to translation — Lilt being one of them. "From these projects, we hope to learn the feasibility of applying automation to gain efficiency with translation turnaround times while reducing the burden of translation on our personnel, especially during critical hazardous weather events," Bozeman wrote. 
 [ 1]: https://news.mit.edu/2017/explained-neural-networks-deep-learning-0414 [ 2]: https://techcrunch.com/2022/04/07/lilt-raises-55m-to-bolster-its-business-focused-ai-translation-platform/ [ 3]: https://www.migrationpolicy.org/article/frequently-requested-statistics-immigrants-and-immigration-united-states-2020#immig-now-historical [ 4]: https://www.nytimes.com/2022/03/03/nyregion/severe-weather-alerts-languages-ida.html [ 5]: https://www.nbcnews.com/news/latino/latino-meteorologist-helped-spur-spanish-language-changes-weather-aler-rcna51674 [ 6]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7413658/ [ 7]: https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/bams/102/4/BAMS-D-20-0249.1.xml 
Link to the original story.
Notes



The views expressed in any and all content distributed by Newstex and its re-distributors (collectively, the "Newstex Authoritative Content") are solely those of the respective author(s) and not necessarily the views of Newstex or its re-distributors. Stories from such authors are provided "AS IS," with no warranties, and confer no rights. The material and information provided in Newstex Authoritative Content are for general information only and should not, in any respect, be relied on as professional advice. Newstex Authoritative Content is not "read and approved" before it is posted. Accordingly, neither Newstex nor its re-distributors make any claims, promises or guarantees about the accuracy, completeness, or adequacy of the information contained therein or linked to from such content, nor do they take responsibility for any aspect of such content. The Newstex Authoritative Content shall be construed as author-based content and commentary. Accordingly, no warranties or other guarantees are offered as to the quality of the opinions, commentary or anything else appearing in such Newstex Authoritative Content. Newstex and its re-distributors expressly reserve the right to delete stories at its and their sole discretion.
Load-Date: October 21, 2022



End of Document


EPA To Investigate Miss. Racial Bias In Jackson Water Crisis
Law360 Legal News - Corporate
October 21, 2022 Friday

Copyright 2022 Portfolio Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Section: COMPLIANCE, ENVIRONMENTAL, PRODUCT LIABILITY, 
Length: 806 words
Byline: Madeline Lyskawa
Highlight: The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has launched a probe into whether Mississippi officials discriminated against the city of Jackson's majority Black population in its allocation of federal funds meant for drinking water, in response to a Title VI complaint filed by the NAACP.
Body




The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has launched a probe into whether Mississippi officials discriminated against the city of Jackson's majority Black population in its allocation of federal funds meant for drinking water, in response to a Title VI complaint filed by the NAACP.

 The EPA wrote a letter to the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People on Thursday, announcing that it plans to investigate an administrative complaint filed by the civil rights group in late September, saying after careful consideration it determined that the claims against the Mississippi Department of Health and the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality meet jurisdictional requirements.

 The EPA's Office of External Civil Rights Compliance, which resides within its Office of Environmental Justice and External Civil Rights, rejected the NAACP's claims against the state's Department of Finance and Administration, however, saying it is not a recipient of EPA financial assistance.

 The other departments, MDH and MDEQ, met the agency's jurisdictional requirements for review in part because they receive federal funds from the EPA, the agency said.

 The NAACP launched its Title VI complaint against the three departments Sept. 27, alongside nine state residents, seeking an immediate investigation into their use of EPA funds related to Jackson's drinking water, as well as for the enactment of rapid enforcement remedies.

 In its complaint, the NAACP accused the departments of discriminating against the city's large Black population by diverting federal funds intended to ensure safe drinking water and unpolluted surface water and groundwater.

 "This discrimination is evident in the state's repeatedly having deprived Jackson of federal funds to maintain its public drinking water system in favor of funding smaller, majority-white communities with less acute needs," the NAACP said in its letter to the agency.

 As a result of this discrimination, the NAACP said the city has been plagued with "persistently unsafe and unreliable drinking water" and "massive gaps in the access to safe drinking water that are intolerable in any modern society."

 The organization said its complaint was prompted by Jackson's shutdown of its drinking water supply for many days in late August. When the water supply was restored, the NAACP said the city's water remained unsafe to drink, and under a boil-water notice, until Sept. 15.

 "Nearly all of the residents of Jackson have watched brackish, dirty, impure, and undrinkable water trickle from their taps," the NAACP said. "At times, some have had no water at all."

 This latest water shut-off is not a one-time occurrence, the NAACP said, but rather part of a series of incidents depriving Black residents of safe drinking water in large part due to the state's refusal to allocate adequate funds for Jackson to address its water system challenges.

 Furthermore, the NAACP accused the state of exacerbating the funding gap between what the city is allocated and what it needs by repeatedly denying Jackson the opportunity to fund improvements to its drinking water system and manage its debt.

 In its response, the EPA said it will specifically investigate whether the two Mississippi departments discriminated against Jackson's Black population in its funding of water infrastructure and treatment programs. Additionally, the agency said it will explore whether the departments are implementing required procedural safeguards, in compliance with their general nondiscrimination obligations.

 The EPA made sure to note in its response, however, that its initiation of the investigation into the complaint's claims is "not a decision on the merits."

 "[The Office of External Civil Rights Compliance] is a neutral fact finder and will begin its process to gather the relevant information, discuss the matter further with you and MDH and MDEQ, and determine next steps utilizing OECRC's internal procedures," the agency said.

 Jackson's recent water crisis has even gained congressional attention, when U.S. Reps. Carolyn Maloney, D-N.Y., and Bennie Thompson, D-Miss., sent a letter to Mississippi Gov. Tate Reeves on Oct. 17 expressing concerns over the state's allocation of more than $10 billion in federal funds that were specifically allotted for improving the state's water infrastructure. The letter is part of a larger congressional investigation into the issue.

 MDH and MDEQ have been given a 30-day deadline to respond to the claims being investigated against them.

 The NAACP's Mississippi State Conference and the Mississippi Center for Justice also joined the NAACP in its complaint.

 Representatives for the EPA, the NAACP, and the three Mississippi departments did not immediately respond to requests for comment on Friday.

 --Editing by Ellen Johnson.
Link to PDF
Link to PDF
Load-Date: November 3, 2022



End of Document


EPA launches civil rights probe over Jackson water crisis
Greenwire
October 21, 2022 Friday

Copyright 2022 Politico LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: TODAY'S STORIES; Vol. 10; No. 9
Length: 839 words
Body




By Hannah Northey This story was updated at 2:15 p.m. EDT. EPA is opening a federal civil rights investigation into whether the Republican-led state of Mississippi violated the Civil Rights Act by discriminating against the majority-Black city of Jackson by blocking funding for a water treatment plant there that recently crashed. EPA on Thursday said it will take up a complaint lawyers representing the NAACP and a group of private residents filed last month, which accused state officials of starving Jackson of the funds needed to provide basic necessities like clean water (Greenwire , Sept. 28). Years of inadequate staffing, funding and maintenance backlogs have fueled system failures, regulatory concerns and hundreds of boil-water notices tied to the O.B. Curtis Water Treatment Plant. 
In August, the plant was overwhelmed by floodwaters from the Pearl River, which ultimately triggered a dangerous drop in pressure that left more than 150,000 people without safe drinking water. Anhthu Hoang, acting head of EPA's Office of External Civil Rights Compliance, on Thursday told lawyers representing NAACP in a letter that the agency will investigate whether the Mississippi State Department of Health and the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality discriminated against Jackson "on the basis of race in the funding of water infrastructure and treatment programs and activities." Hoang's letter was addressed to Janette McCarthy Wallace, NAACP's general counsel, and Carol Browner, ex-EPA chief under former President Bill Clinton and climate czar to former President Barack Obama, who is now a partner with the law firm Covington & Burling LLP, who had filed the complaint under Title 6 of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. The letter was also addressed to Gary Guzy, senior counsel at Covington. The law bars recipients of federal financial assistance from discriminating on the base of race, color or national origin in programs or activities. "This discrimination is evident in the State's repeatedly having deprived Jackson of federal funds to maintain its public drinking water system in favor of funding smaller, majority-white communities with less acute needs - despite the fact that Jackson is Mississippi's most populous city, with a demonstrated need for improvements to water infrastructure," McCarthy Wallace and Browner and Guzy wrote in the complaint. Hoang said the NAACP's request met the jurisdictional requirements, but rejected allegations against the Mississippi Department of Finance and Administration because the agency doesn't receive federal financial assistance. Specifically, EPA is investigating whether the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality and the Mississippi State Department of Health discriminated against the city of Jackson on the "basis of race and color, by intent or effect" in funding water infrastructure and treatment programs and activities. Another focus of the investigation is whether the state agencies have or are implementing the "procedural safeguards" to comply with their general nondiscrimination obligations. The two state agencies did not immediately respond to a request for comment. The NAACP in a statement applauded EPA and the Biden administration for opening the federal civil rights investigation. "This action is only the first step. NAACP and its partners will continue to press the Biden Administration and Congress to hold state officials accountable and ensure that Jackson officials and residents are active participants in the decision-making that will be required to fix the unacceptable problems with Jackon's water," said NAACP President Derrick Johnson. Attorneys for the NAACP had argued that Mississippi officials, including Republican Gov. Tate Reeves, the Legislature, state treasurer and multiple agencies, repeatedly deprived the city of Jackson of necessary funding that met the populous city's needs. Reeves' office did not immediately respond to a request for comment. State agencies, for example, awarded federal funds to the city through state revolving funds just three times in the past 25 years while channeling money to majority-white areas with less need, according to the complaint. The complaint also accused Reeves and the Republican-controlled state Legislature of taking other steps to block the city from helping itself, including vetoing legislation that would have provided Jackson with money to fix its water system, rejecting a sales tax to fund repairs there and appointing a state commission that hampered the city's expenditures. The O.B. Curtis water plant has long been on EPA's radar for lagging maintenance and staffing woes. The Department of Justice on behalf of EPA last month threatened to take legal action if the city of Jackson didn't enter into negotiations to address a series of outstanding violations under the Safe Drinking Water Act (Greenwire , Sept. 27). EPA's announcement arrives mere days after two congressional committees launched an investigation into the crisis (E&E News PM , Oct. 17).
Load-Date: November 18, 2022



End of Document


EPA civil rights case targets Mississippi over Jackson water
Associated Press State & Local
October 21, 2022 Friday 1:04 AM GMT

Copyright 2022 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS; POLITICAL NEWS; STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 948 words
Byline: EMILY WAGSTER PETTUS, MATTHEW DALY and AARON MORRISON, Associated Press
Dateline: JACKSON, Miss. 
Body




JACKSON, Miss. (AP) — The federal government is investigating whether Mississippi state agencies discriminated against the state's majority-Black capital city by refusing to fund improvements for its failing water system, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency said Thursday.
The announcement came days after leaders of two congressional committees said they were starting a joint investigation into a crisis that left most homes and businesses in Jackson without running water for several days in late August and early September.
The EPA gave The Associated Press the first confirmation that it is conducting a civil, not criminal, investigation of the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality and the Mississippi State Department of Health. The federal agency could withhold money from the state if it finds wrongdoing — potentially millions of dollars. If the state agencies don’t cooperate with the investigation, the EPA could refer the case to the Department of Justice.
Heavy rainfall in late August exacerbated problems at Jackson's main water treatment facility. Republican Gov. Tate Reeves declared an emergency Aug. 29, and the state health department and the Mississippi Emergency Management Agency have been overseeing operations and repairs at the facility since then.
About 80% of Jackson’s 150,000 residents are Black, and about a quarter of the population lives in poverty. By the time Reeves issued the emergency order, Jackson residents had already been told for a month to boil their water to kill possible contaminants. Volunteers and the National Guard had distributed millions of bottles of drinking water. Although the boil-water notice was lifted in mid-September, many residents remain skeptical about water safety.
NAACP President Derrick Johnson, who lives in Jackson with his family, called the EPA investigation a step in the right direction after years of the state withholding federal funds needed to improve the city’s water system.
“We believe we gave compelling evidence that the state of Mississippi intentionally starved the city of Jackson of the resources to maintain its water infrastructure,” Johnson told The AP on Thursday. “We want the EPA and this administration to put forth a course of action to prevent the state of Mississippi from ever doing this again.”
Johnson was named among several residents in the NAACP’s civil rights complaint against Mississippi. He said the state’s inaction and record of divestment in Jackson amounts to “systemic neglect.”
“We believe that all citizens of this country should be entitled to clean, fresh drinking water,” Johnson said. “Unfortunately, we live in a state that is still dealing in racial politics. And as a result of that, you have state leaders who seek to penalize African American residents of the city of Jackson in a very discriminatory way.”
The AP reported in September that years before Reeves became governor, he touted his own track record of fiscal conservatism by citing his opposition to spending state money for Jackson's crumbling water and sewer infrastructure. The EPA is not investigating Reeves.
Reeves said Thursday that the state took control of Jackson’s water system because of “absolute and total incompetence” of the city's Democratic mayor and administration. The governor’s latest remarks are an escalation of a dispute between him and Mayor Chokwe Antar Lumumba over whether the state or the city will decide on a private firm to operate Jackson’s water system.
“They have proven that they have no ability to manage the water system,” Reeves told reporters during an event at the Governor’s Mansion, according to a video of the event by WLBT-TV.
Melissa Payne, a city spokesperson, said Lumumba would not respond to the governor's statements.
In a federal complaint Sept. 27, the NAACP said Mississippi officials “all but assured” a drinking water calamity by depriving Jackson of badly needed funds to upgrade its infrastructure. The organization asked the EPA to investigate the state’s alleged pattern of steering money to majority-white communities with less need.
The group said the state’s refusal to fund improvements in Jackson culminated in the near-total collapse of the water system in late August. Over 25 years, Jackson received funds from an important federal program only three times, the NAACP said. When Jackson tried to fund improvements itself, those efforts were repeatedly blocked by state political leaders, according to the complaint.
The NAACP wants the EPA to make sure that from now on, federal funds are distributed equitably.
Reeves said Thursday that the state has bought chemicals and hired workers for the water plant since he declared the emergency, after the city failed to do both of those things.
The NAACP filed its complaint under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which forbids recipients of federal funds from discriminating based on race or national origin. While previously the law was rarely used to pursue environmental matters, the Biden administration has increased its enforcement efforts in communities overburdened by pollution.
Recently, the EPA said it had preliminary evidence that Louisiana officials allowed air pollution to remain high and downplayed the threat to Black residents who live in the industrial section of the state commonly referred to as cancer alley. The agency has also opened up an investigation into Colorado’s air permitting program and into state and local officials in Alabama over chronic wastewater problems in majority-Black Lowndes County.
___
Associated Press writer Michael Phillis in St. Louis contributed to this report. Daly reported from Washington and Morrison reported from New York.
Load-Date: October 20, 2022



End of Document


RESCISSION - SW 161ST LOOP - OCTOBER 21, 2022
US Fed News
October 21, 2022 Friday 9:32 AM  EST

Copyright 2022 HT Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Length: 143 words
Body




OCALA, Fla., Oct. 21 -- Marion County issued the following news release:
RESCISSION OF PRECAUTIONARY BOIL WATER NOTICE
Effective Date: 10/21/2022
Due to: 6" Water Main Repair
Marion County Utilities is rescinding the boil water notice for the
Marion Oaks Community
For homes and businesses located on: 2756, 2748, 2741, 2735, 2736, 2731, 2695, 2696, 2691 SW 161st Loop
The "precautionary boil water notice" from: 10/19/2022
is hereby rescinded following the satisfactory completion of the bacteriological survey showing that the water is safe to drink.
If you have any questions, you may contact our Customer Service Department at 352-307-6000.
Please contact Marion County Utilities customer service to update your phone number at
352-307-6000. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
Load-Date: October 22, 2022



End of Document


EPA civil rights case targets Mississippi over Jackson water
Associated Press International
October 21, 2022 Friday 1:04 AM GMT

Copyright 2022 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS; POLITICAL NEWS; STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 948 words
Byline: EMILY WAGSTER PETTUS, MATTHEW DALY and AARON MORRISON, Associated Press
Dateline: JACKSON, Miss. 
Body




JACKSON, Miss. (AP) — The federal government is investigating whether Mississippi state agencies discriminated against the state's majority-Black capital city by refusing to fund improvements for its failing water system, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency said Thursday.
The announcement came days after leaders of two congressional committees said they were starting a joint investigation into a crisis that left most homes and businesses in Jackson without running water for several days in late August and early September.
The EPA gave The Associated Press the first confirmation that it is conducting a civil, not criminal, investigation of the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality and the Mississippi State Department of Health. The federal agency could withhold money from the state if it finds wrongdoing — potentially millions of dollars. If the state agencies don’t cooperate with the investigation, the EPA could refer the case to the Department of Justice.
Heavy rainfall in late August exacerbated problems at Jackson's main water treatment facility. Republican Gov. Tate Reeves declared an emergency Aug. 29, and the state health department and the Mississippi Emergency Management Agency have been overseeing operations and repairs at the facility since then.
About 80% of Jackson’s 150,000 residents are Black, and about a quarter of the population lives in poverty. By the time Reeves issued the emergency order, Jackson residents had already been told for a month to boil their water to kill possible contaminants. Volunteers and the National Guard had distributed millions of bottles of drinking water. Although the boil-water notice was lifted in mid-September, many residents remain skeptical about water safety.
NAACP President Derrick Johnson, who lives in Jackson with his family, called the EPA investigation a step in the right direction after years of the state withholding federal funds needed to improve the city’s water system.
“We believe we gave compelling evidence that the state of Mississippi intentionally starved the city of Jackson of the resources to maintain its water infrastructure,” Johnson told The AP on Thursday. “We want the EPA and this administration to put forth a course of action to prevent the state of Mississippi from ever doing this again.”
Johnson was named among several residents in the NAACP’s civil rights complaint against Mississippi. He said the state’s inaction and record of divestment in Jackson amounts to “systemic neglect.”
“We believe that all citizens of this country should be entitled to clean, fresh drinking water,” Johnson said. “Unfortunately, we live in a state that is still dealing in racial politics. And as a result of that, you have state leaders who seek to penalize African American residents of the city of Jackson in a very discriminatory way.”
The AP reported in September that years before Reeves became governor, he touted his own track record of fiscal conservatism by citing his opposition to spending state money for Jackson's crumbling water and sewer infrastructure. The EPA is not investigating Reeves.
Reeves said Thursday that the state took control of Jackson’s water system because of “absolute and total incompetence” of the city's Democratic mayor and administration. The governor’s latest remarks are an escalation of a dispute between him and Mayor Chokwe Antar Lumumba over whether the state or the city will decide on a private firm to operate Jackson’s water system.
“They have proven that they have no ability to manage the water system,” Reeves told reporters during an event at the Governor’s Mansion, according to a video of the event by WLBT-TV.
Melissa Payne, a city spokesperson, said Lumumba would not respond to the governor's statements.
In a federal complaint Sept. 27, the NAACP said Mississippi officials “all but assured” a drinking water calamity by depriving Jackson of badly needed funds to upgrade its infrastructure. The organization asked the EPA to investigate the state’s alleged pattern of steering money to majority-white communities with less need.
The group said the state’s refusal to fund improvements in Jackson culminated in the near-total collapse of the water system in late August. Over 25 years, Jackson received funds from an important federal program only three times, the NAACP said. When Jackson tried to fund improvements itself, those efforts were repeatedly blocked by state political leaders, according to the complaint.
The NAACP wants the EPA to make sure that from now on, federal funds are distributed equitably.
Reeves said Thursday that the state has bought chemicals and hired workers for the water plant since he declared the emergency, after the city failed to do both of those things.
The NAACP filed its complaint under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which forbids recipients of federal funds from discriminating based on race or national origin. While previously the law was rarely used to pursue environmental matters, the Biden administration has increased its enforcement efforts in communities overburdened by pollution.
Recently, the EPA said it had preliminary evidence that Louisiana officials allowed air pollution to remain high and downplayed the threat to Black residents who live in the industrial section of the state commonly referred to as cancer alley. The agency has also opened up an investigation into Colorado’s air permitting program and into state and local officials in Alabama over chronic wastewater problems in majority-Black Lowndes County.
___
Associated Press writer Michael Phillis in St. Louis contributed to this report. Daly reported from Washington and Morrison reported from New York.
Load-Date: October 20, 2022



End of Document


EPA civil rights case targets Mississippi over Jackson water
The Associated Press
October 21, 2022 Friday 1:04 AM GMT

Copyright 2022 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS; POLITICAL NEWS; STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 947 words
Byline: EMILY WAGSTER PETTUS, MATTHEW DALY and AARON MORRISON, Associated Press
Dateline: JACKSON, Miss. 
Body




JACKSON, Miss. — The federal government is investigating whether Mississippi state agencies discriminated against the state's majority-Black capital city by refusing to fund improvements for its failing water system, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency said Thursday.
The announcement came days after leaders of two congressional committees said they were starting a joint investigation into a crisis that left most homes and businesses in Jackson without running water for several days in late August and early September.
The EPA gave The Associated Press the first confirmation that it is conducting a civil, not criminal, investigation of the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality and the Mississippi State Department of Health. The federal agency could withhold money from the state if it finds wrongdoing — potentially millions of dollars. If the state agencies don’t cooperate with the investigation, the EPA could refer the case to the Department of Justice.
Heavy rainfall in late August exacerbated problems at Jackson's main water treatment facility. Republican Gov. Tate Reeves declared an emergency Aug. 29, and the state health department and the Mississippi Emergency Management Agency have been overseeing operations and repairs at the facility since then.
About 80% of Jackson’s 150,000 residents are Black, and about a quarter of the population lives in poverty. By the time Reeves issued the emergency order, Jackson residents had already been told for a month to boil their water to kill possible contaminants. Volunteers and the National Guard had distributed millions of bottles of drinking water. Although the boil-water notice was lifted in mid-September, many residents remain skeptical about water safety.
NAACP President Derrick Johnson, who lives in Jackson with his family, called the EPA investigation a step in the right direction after years of the state withholding federal funds needed to improve the city’s water system.
“We believe we gave compelling evidence that the state of Mississippi intentionally starved the city of Jackson of the resources to maintain its water infrastructure,” Johnson told The AP on Thursday. “We want the EPA and this administration to put forth a course of action to prevent the state of Mississippi from ever doing this again.”
Johnson was named among several residents in the NAACP’s civil rights complaint against Mississippi. He said the state’s inaction and record of divestment in Jackson amounts to “systemic neglect.”
“We believe that all citizens of this country should be entitled to clean, fresh drinking water,” Johnson said. “Unfortunately, we live in a state that is still dealing in racial politics. And as a result of that, you have state leaders who seek to penalize African American residents of the city of Jackson in a very discriminatory way.”
The AP reported in September that years before Reeves became governor, he touted his own track record of fiscal conservatism by citing his opposition to spending state money for Jackson's crumbling water and sewer infrastructure. The EPA is not investigating Reeves.
Reeves said Thursday that the state took control of Jackson’s water system because of “absolute and total incompetence” of the city's Democratic mayor and administration. The governor’s latest remarks are an escalation of a dispute between him and Mayor Chokwe Antar Lumumba over whether the state or the city will decide on a private firm to operate Jackson’s water system.
“They have proven that they have no ability to manage the water system,” Reeves told reporters during an event at the Governor’s Mansion, according to a video of the event by WLBT-TV.
Melissa Payne, a city spokesperson, said Lumumba would not respond to the governor's statements.
In a federal complaint Sept. 27, the NAACP said Mississippi officials “all but assured” a drinking water calamity by depriving Jackson of badly needed funds to upgrade its infrastructure. The organization asked the EPA to investigate the state’s alleged pattern of steering money to majority-white communities with less need.
The group said the state’s refusal to fund improvements in Jackson culminated in the near-total collapse of the water system in late August. Over 25 years, Jackson received funds from an important federal program only three times, the NAACP said. When Jackson tried to fund improvements itself, those efforts were repeatedly blocked by state political leaders, according to the complaint.
The NAACP wants the EPA to make sure that from now on, federal funds are distributed equitably.
Reeves said Thursday that the state has bought chemicals and hired workers for the water plant since he declared the emergency, after the city failed to do both of those things.
The NAACP filed its complaint under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which forbids recipients of federal funds from discriminating based on race or national origin. While previously the law was rarely used to pursue environmental matters, the Biden administration has increased its enforcement efforts in communities overburdened by pollution.
Recently, the EPA said it had preliminary evidence that Louisiana officials allowed air pollution to remain high and downplayed the threat to Black residents who live in the industrial section of the state commonly referred to as cancer alley. The agency has also opened up an investigation into Colorado’s air permitting program and into state and local officials in Alabama over chronic wastewater problems in majority-Black Lowndes County.
___
Associated Press writer Michael Phillis in St. Louis contributed to this report. Daly reported from Washington and Morrison reported from New York.
Load-Date: October 20, 2022



End of Document


AP News in Brief at 11:04 p.m. EDT
The Associated Press
October 21, 2022 Friday 3:04 AM GMT

Copyright 2022 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 2315 words
Body




Truss quits, but UK's political and economic turmoil persist
LONDON — British Prime Minister Liz Truss quit Thursday after a tumultuous and historically brief term marred by economic policies that roiled financial markets and a rebellion in her political party that obliterated her authority.
After just 45 days in office, Truss became the third Conservative prime minister to be toppled in as many years, and she will go down as the shortest-serving leader in British history. Her resignation extends the instability that has shaken Britain since it broke off from the European Union and leaves its leadership in limbo as the country faces a cost-of-living crisis and looming recession.
“I cannot deliver the mandate on which I was elected by the Conservative Party,” Truss, 47, said outside her 10 Downing Street office.
Financial markets breathed a sigh of relief, but now a divided ruling party must quickly find a leader who can unify its warring factions. Truss said she will remain in office until a replacement is chosen, which the Conservative Party said it would do by the end of next week, an extremely fast timeline for choosing the next leader of one of the world's largest economies.
Potential contenders include: former Treasury chief Rishi Sunak, who lost to Truss in the last leadership contest; House of Commons leader Penny Mordaunt; Defense Secretary Ben Wallace; and Boris Johnson, the former prime minister ousted in July over a series of ethics scandals.
___
Afghan couple accuse US Marine of abducting their baby
The young Afghan couple raced to the airport in Kabul, clutching their baby girl close amid the chaotic withdrawal of American troops last year.
The baby had been rescued two years earlier from the rubble of a U.S. military raid that killed her parents and five siblings. After months in a U.S. military hospital, she had gone to live with her cousin and his wife, this newlywed couple. Now, the family was bound for the United States for further medical treatment, with the aid of U.S. Marine Corps attorney Joshua Mast.
When the exhausted Afghans arrived at the airport in Washington, D.C., in late August 2021, Mast pulled them out of the international arrivals line and led them to an inspecting officer, according to a lawsuit they filed last month. They were surprised when Mast presented an Afghan passport for the child, the couple said. But it was the last name printed on the document that stopped them cold: Mast.
They didn’t know it, but they would soon lose their baby.
This is a story about how one U.S. Marine became fiercely determined to bring home an Afghan war orphan, and praised it as an act of Christian faith to save her. Letters, emails and documents submitted in federal filings show that he used his status in the U.S. Armed Forces, appealed to high-ranking Trump administration officials and turned to small-town courts to adopt the baby, unbeknownst to the Afghan couple raising her 7,000 miles (11,000 kilometers) away.
___
Russian, Ukrainian troops gird for major battle in Kherson
KYIV, Ukraine (AP) — Russian and Ukrainian troops appeared Thursday to be girding for a major battle over the strategic southern industrial port city of Kherson, in a region which Russian President Vladimir Putin has illegally annexed and subjected to martial law.
Fighting and evacuations were reported in the Kherson region as Moscow tried to pound the invaded country into submission with more missile and drone attacks on critical infrastructure.
Putin declared martial law in the Kherson, Luhansk, Donetsk and Zaporizhzhia regions on Wednesday in an attempt to assert Russian authority in the annexed areas as he faced battlefield setbacks, a troubled troop mobilization, increasing criticism at home and abroad, and international sanctions.
The unsettled status of the illegally absorbed territory was especially visible in the Kherson region’s capital, where Russian military officials have replaced Kremlin-installed civilian leaders as part of martial law that took effect Thursday to defend against a Ukrainian counteroffensive.
Kherson city, with a prewar population of about 284,000, was one of the first urban areas Russia captured when it invaded Ukraine, and it remains the largest city it holds. It is a prime target for both sides because of its key industries and major river port. Reports of sabotage and assassinations of Russian-installed officials in Kherson have surfaced for months, in what appeared to be one of the most active Ukrainian resistance movements in occupied territory.
___
Slavery is on the ballot for voters in 5 US states
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) — More than 150 years after slaves were freed in the U.S., voters in five states will soon decide whether to close loopholes that led to the proliferation of a different form of slavery — forced labor by people convicted of certain crimes.
None of the proposals would force immediate changes inside the states' prisons, though they could lead to legal challenges related to how they use prison labor, a lasting imprint of slavery’s legacy on the entire United States.
The effort is part of a national push to amend the 13th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution that banned enslavement or involuntary servitude except as a form of criminal punishment. That exception has long permitted the exploitation of labor by convicted felons.
“The idea that you could ever finish the sentence ‘slavery’s okay when ... ’ has to rip out your soul, and I think it’s what makes this a fight that ignores political lines and brings us together, because it feels so clear,” said Bianca Tylek, executive director of Worth Rises, a criminal justice advocacy group pushing to remove the amendment's convict labor clause.
Nearly 20 states have constitutions that include language permitting slavery and involuntary servitude as criminal punishments. In 2018, Colorado was the first to remove the language from its founding frameworks by ballot measure, followed by Nebraska and Utah two years later.
___
EPA civil rights case targets Mississippi over Jackson water
JACKSON, Miss. (AP) — The federal government is investigating whether Mississippi state agencies discriminated against the state's majority-Black capital city by refusing to fund improvements for its failing water system, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency said Thursday.
The announcement came days after leaders of two congressional committees said they were starting a joint investigation into a crisis that left most homes and businesses in Jackson without running water for several days in late August and early September.
The EPA gave The Associated Press the first confirmation that it is conducting a civil, not criminal, investigation of the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality and the Mississippi State Department of Health. The federal agency could withhold money from the state if it finds wrongdoing — potentially millions of dollars. If the state agencies don’t cooperate with the investigation, the EPA could refer the case to the Department of Justice.
Heavy rainfall in late August exacerbated problems at Jackson's main water treatment facility. Republican Gov. Tate Reeves declared an emergency Aug. 29, and the state health department and the Mississippi Emergency Management Agency have been overseeing operations and repairs at the facility since then.
About 80% of Jackson’s 150,000 residents are Black, and about a quarter of the population lives in poverty. By the time Reeves issued the emergency order, Jackson residents had already been told for a month to boil their water to kill possible contaminants. Volunteers and the National Guard had distributed millions of bottles of drinking water. Although the boil-water notice was lifted in mid-September, many residents remain skeptical about water safety.
___
Judge dismisses effort to halt student loan forgiveness plan
ST. LOUIS (AP) — A federal judge on Thursday dismissed an effort by six Republican-led states to block the Biden administration's plan to forgive student loan debt for tens of millions of Americans.
U.S. District Judge Henry Autrey in St. Louis wrote that because the six states — Nebraska, Missouri, Arkansas, Iowa, Kansas and South Carolina — failed to establish they had standing, “the Court lacks jurisdiction to hear this case.”
Suzanne Gage, spokeswoman for Nebraska Attorney General Doug Peterson, said the states will appeal. She said in a statement that the states "continue to believe that they do in fact have standing to raise their important legal challenges.”
Democratic President Joe Biden announced in August that his administration would cancel up to $20,000 in education debt for huge numbers of borrowers. The announcement immediately became a major political issue ahead of the November midterm elections.
The states' lawsuit is among a few that have been filed. Earlier Thursday, Supreme Court Justice Amy Coney Barrett rejected an appeal from a Wisconsin taxpayers group seeking to stop the debt cancellation program.
___
Arizona farm gives refuge from pain, for man and beast alike
CORNVILLE, Ariz. (AP) — The leader has the name of her dead baby spelled out in beads on her left wrist, and standing before her is a mother so grief-choked by her young son’s death that she flips on her side at one point in this creekside yoga class and sobs. In the next row, a woman whose daughter died by suicide goes through the poses next to a man with a tattoo of three little ducks, one for each of the children who was murdered.
Just beyond, in the fields of this sanctuary for the grieving, is a sheep whose babies were snatched by coyotes, a goat saved from slaughter and a horse that was badly mistreated carrying loads at the Grand Canyon.
Soon, the morning fog will lift and the chorus of cicadas will end the quiet. But for a moment, all is still, as if nature has paused to acknowledge this gathering of worldly suffering.
“There’s a comfort in knowing,” says Suzy Elghanayan, a mother whose young son died earlier this year of a seizure, “that we’re all in the same place that we never wanted to be.”
The world turns away from stories like theirs because it’s too hard to imagine burying a child. So mourning people from around the globe journey to this patch of farmland just outside the red rocks of Sedona.
___
'Momentous': Asian Americans laud Anna May Wong's US quarter
More than 60 years after Anna May Wong became the first Asian American woman to receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, the pioneering actor has coined another first, quite literally.
With quarters bearing her face and manicured hand set to start shipping Monday, per the U.S. Mint, Wong will be the first Asian American to grace U.S. currency. Few could have been more stunned at the honor than her niece and namesake, Anna Wong, who learned about the American Women Quarters honor from the Mint's head legal consul.
“From there, it went into the designs and there were so many talented artists with many different renditions. I actually pulled out a quarter to look at the size to try and imagine how the images would transfer over to real life,” Anna Wong wrote in an email to The Associated Press.
The elder Wong, who fought against stereotypes foisted on her by a white Hollywood, is one of five women being honored this year as part of the program. She was chosen for being “a courageous advocate who championed for increased representation and more multi-dimensional roles for Asian American actors,” Mint Director Ventris Gibson said in a statement.
The other icons chosen include writer Maya Angelou; Dr. Sally Ride, an educator and the first American woman in space; Wilma Mankiller, the first female elected principal chief of the Cherokee Nation; and Nina Otero-Warren, a trailblazer for New Mexico’s suffrage movement.
___
Ex-UCLA gynecologist found guilty in LA sex abuse case
LOS ANGELES (AP) — A former gynecologist at the University of California, Los Angeles was found guilty Thursday of five counts of sexually abusing female patients, in a criminal case that came after the university system made nearly $700 million in lawsuit payouts.
The Los Angeles jury found Dr. James Heaps, a longtime UCLA campus gynecologist, not guilty of seven of the 21 counts and were deadlocked on the remaining charges.
In the wake of the scandal that erupted in 2019 following the doctor's arrest, UCLA agreed to pay nearly $700 million in lawsuit settlements to hundreds of Heaps’ patients — a record amount by a public university amid a wave of sexual misconduct scandals by campus doctors in recent years.
Heaps, 65, had pleaded not guilty to 21 felony counts in the sexual assaults of seven women between 2009 and 2018. He has denied wrongdoing.
Heaps was indicted last year on multiple counts each of sexual battery by fraud, sexual exploitation of a patient and sexual penetration of an unconscious person by fraudulent representation.
___
Jury: Kevin Spacey didn't molest actor Anthony Rapp in 1986
NEW YORK (AP) — A jury sided with Kevin Spacey on Thursday in one of the lawsuits that derailed the film star’s career, finding he did not sexually abuse Anthony Rapp, then 14, while both were relatively unknown actors in Broadway plays in 1986.
The verdict in the civil trial came with lightning speed. Jurors at a federal court in New York deliberated for a little more than an hour before deciding that Rapp hadn't proven his allegations.
When the verdict was read, Spacey dropped his head, then hugged his lawyers. He didn't speak to reporters as he left the courthouse.
“We’re very grateful to the jury for seeing through these false allegations,” said his attorney, Jennifer Keller.
“What’s next is Mr. Spacey is going to be proven that he’s innocent of anything he’s been accused of. That there was no truth to any of the allegations,” she added, a reference to other sexual misconduct claims against the actor, including criminal charges in England.
Load-Date: October 20, 2022



End of Document


Sen. Rick Scott Shares Updated Federal Resources Guide for Florida Families Recovering from Major Hurricane Ian; Sen. Rick Scott (R-FL) News Release
Congressional Documents and Publications
October 21, 2022

Copyright 2022 Federal Information and News Dispatch, Inc.
Section: U.S. SENATE DOCUMENTS
Length: 3779 words
Body




WASHINGTON, D.C. - Today, Senator Rick Scott shared an update of actions he has taken over the last month in response to Hurricane Ian and issued an updated guide to federal resources available for Florida families and businesses working to recover from the devastation. This week, Senator Scott spoke with U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Secretary Tom Vilsack to reiterate the critical need for his agency to approve the State of Florida's request for a USDA disaster declaration and get much needed resources to Florida's farmers. He also again spoke with Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Regional Administrator Gracia Szczech and Small Business Administration (SBA) Administrator Isabella Casillas Guzman to discuss the ongoing federal response to Hurricane Ian. Senator Scott continues visiting and speaking with mayors, law enforcement, community, faith and business leaders, utilities and federal officials to ensure Florida's families and communities are getting every resource needed to recover from Ian.
In preparation for and response to Hurricane Ian, Senator Scott has taken the following actions to assist Floridians:
* October 20, 2022: Sen. Rick Scott to FEMA and SBA: Robust Federal Response to Hurricane Ian is Critical to Ensuring a Full Recovery for Florida Families and Businesses
* October 18, 2022: Sens. Rick Scott and Marco Rubio Lead Florida Delegation in Urging Commerce Department to Declare Disaster in Response to Hurricane Ian
* October 18, 2022: Sen. Rick Scott and Colleagues to USDA: Send Relief Supplies to Florida Farmers Affected by Hurricane Ian
* October 14, 2022: Sens. Rick Scott and Marco Rubio Lead Florida Delegation in Urging USDA to Declare Disaster for Florida Agriculture
* October 13, 2022: PHOTO RELEASE Sen. Rick Scott Thanks Disaster Relief Volunteers at Fort Myers Church
* October 13, 2022: Sen. Rick Scott Urges Action in Letters to EV Makers and U.S. DOT After Reports of Dangerous Vehicle Fires Following Hurricane Ian
* October 13, 2022: Sen. Rick Scott on CPI Report: Biden's Raging Inflation is Crushing Floridians Recovering From Ian
* October 12, 2022: PHOTO RELEASE Sen. Rick Scott Meets with St. Johns County First Responders, Tours St. Augustine Neighborhoods Hit by Hurricane Ian
* October 12, 2022: Sen. Rick Scott on PPI Inflation Report: Skyrocketing Inflation Makes Hurricane Ian Recovery More Challenging
* October 11, 2022: Sen. Rick Scott Shares Updated Federal Resources Guide for Florida Families Recovering from Major Hurricane Ian
* October 9, 2022: PHOTO RELEASE Sen. Rick Scott Visits Local Businesses Impacted by Hurricane Ian in Goodland
* October 7, 2022: Following Calls with FEMA and SBA, Sen. Rick Scott Shares Updated Federal Resources Guide for Florida Families Recovering from Major Hurricane Ian
* October 6, 2022: PHOTO RELEASE Sen. Rick Scott Thanks Volunteers with St. Matthew's House in Naples
* October 5, 2022: PHOTO RELEASE Sen. Rick Scott Thanks Volunteers with Red Cross, Salvation Army and Cajun Navy
* October 5, 2022: Sen. Rick Scott: Once FEMA Determines Need, the Senate Must Immediately Reconvene to Vote on Ian Aid Package
* October 5, 2022: PHOTO RELEASE Sen. Rick Scott Visits with Fire Rescue Task Force 1 in Lee County
* October 4, 2022: PHOTO RELEASE Sen. Rick Scott Thanks USCG at Air Station Miami, Receives Briefing on Hurricane Ian Response and Recovery Missions
* October 4, 2022: PHOTO RELEASE Sen. Rick Scott Thanks Line Workers Restoring Power in Southwest Florida
* October 3, 2022: PHOTO RELEASE Sen. Rick Scott Receives Briefing, Thanks Officials, Volunteers Responding to Hurricane Ian in Southwest Florida
* October 2, 2022: Sen. Rick Scott Shares Actions to Support Florida Families Following Major Hurricane Ian, Updates on Federal Resources
* October 1, 2022: PHOTO RELEASE: Sen. Rick Scott Visits Impacted Communities and Osceola County Emergency Operations Center Following Landfall of Major Hurricane Ian
* October 1, 2022: Sens. Rick Scott and Marco Rubio's Request Expediting Major Disaster Declaration for the Seminole Tribe of Florida Approved by President Biden
* October 1, 2022: PHOTO RELEASE: Sen. Rick Scott Visits Sarasota County Emergency Operations Center Following Landfall of Major Hurricane Ian
* September 30, 2022: PHOTO RELEASE: Sen. Rick Scott Visits Charlotte County Emergency Operations Center Following Landfall of Major Hurricane Ian
* September 30, 2022: PHOTO RELEASE: Sen. Rick Scott Visits Lee County Emergency Operations Center Following Landfall of Major Hurricane Ian
* September 30, 2022: Sens. Rick Scott and Marco Rubio Urge Senate Appropriators to Provide Assistance for Florida's Recovery from Major Hurricane Ian
* September 30, 2022: Sen. Rick Scott Sets Record Straight on Misleading Liberal Attacks
* September 29, 2022: Sen. Rick Scott: I'm Fighting to Quickly Deploy Every Federal Resource Needed to Florida
* September 28, 2022: Sens. Rick Scott and Marco Rubio Lead Colleagues Urging Biden to Approve Hurricane Ian Major Disaster Declaration
* September 27, 2022: PHOTO and VIDEO RELEASE: Sen. RICK SCOTT: HURRICANE IAN IS DEADLY, HEED EVACUATION ORDERS NOW
* September 26, 2022: PHOTO RELEASE: Sen. Rick Scott Visits Collier County Emergency Operations Center Ahead of Ian Landfall
* September 26, 2022: Sen. RICK SCOTT RECEIVES BRIEFING ON HURRICANE IAN AT NHC, URGES FLORIDIANS TO STAY ALERT and FOLLOW EVACUATION ORDERS
* September 24, 2022: Sens. Rick Scott and Marco Rubio Urge Biden to Approve Florida's Pre-Landfall Emergency Declaration Request Ahead of Ian
* September 23, 2022: Sen. Rick Scott: Floridians Should get Prepared NOW for Potential Impacts from a Major Hurricane
Helpful Resources for Individuals:
Emergency Service Request:
Provide critical information to first responders to help locate and rescue survivors of Hurricane Ian. This information can help first responders address the needs of impacted households as quickly as possible. Learn more HERE.
How You Can Help:
Learn how you can help Floridians recover from Hurricane Ian by visiting the National Voluntary Organizations Active in Disaster HERE and Volunteer Florida HERE.
Other Helpful Resources for Individuals:
Stay up-to-date with information from your local Emergency Management officials. Find information relating to your county HERE. You may want to also contact the Florida State Assistance Information Line (SAIL) at 1-800-342-3557. Impacted Floridians should not return home until the area is declared to be safe by local officials. Read more from FEMA about returning home HERE.
FEMA
FEMA's role is to help communities prepare for and recover from disasters. Find information specific to Hurricane Ian, including which counties are eligible, on FEMA's website HERE, by calling the FEMA Helpline at 800-621-FEMA (800-621-3362), or registering online at DisasterAssistance.gov. For information regarding FEMA Inspector and Fraud Notices, learn more HERE.
National Flood Insurance Program
Following a Presidential Disaster Declaration, FEMA's National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) policyholders are encouraged to apply for FEMA disaster assistance in addition to their flood insurance claim. Policyholders impacted by Hurricane Ian are encouraged to contact their insurance agents as soon as possible for more information about filing a claim. Get more details about filing a claim HERE or reach NFIP assistance directly HERE or by calling 1-877-336-2627. Once starting a claim, FEMA suggests documenting all damage, including photos and videos, recording serial numbers and securing receipts. FEMA also recommends policyholders should take steps to stop the spread of mold if safe to do so.
If your policy has expired, you may be able to reinstate it if your renewal date was between Aug. 25, 2022, and Oct. 23, 2022. Policyholders whose NFIP policy renewal date is within this range should contact their agent or insurance company. The NFIP has extended the proof of loss requirement for policyholders who experienced flood damage from Hurricane Ian from the standard 60 days to 365 days from the date of loss. For questions about NFIP, call 800-759-8656 or visit Floodsmart.gov.
Citizens Property Insurance
Citizens Property Insurance is urging policyholders to contact them as soon as possible in the wake of Hurricane Ian. Citizens representatives can be reached online HERE or by calling 1-866-411-2742. Additionally, Citizens is warning policyholders to be wary of unlicensed contractors and "deals that sound too good to be true." Policyholders are discouraged from signing anything before consulting with an insurance agent. Citizens policyholders can report suspected fraud online HERE or by calling 1-855-748-9596.
Disaster Recovery Centers
Survivors can visit one of 17 Disaster Recovery Centers. Disaster Recovery Centers provide disaster survivors with information from Florida state agencies, FEMA, and the U.S. Small Business Administration. Survivors can get help applying for federal assistance and disaster loans, update applications and learn about other resources available. Disaster Recovery Centers Open in Brevard, Okeechobee Counties
The State of Florida and FEMA have opened two additional Disaster Recovery Centers (DRC) in Brevard and Okeechobee counties.
BREVARD COUNTY
Cuyler Park Community Center, 2329 Harry T. Moore Ave., Mims, FL 32754
Hours: 8 a.m. to 7 p.m. daily.
OKEECHOBEE COUNTY
Okeechobee County Library, 206 SW 16th St., Okeechobee, FL 34974
Hours: 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. daily.
Disaster Recovery Centers provide disaster survivors with information from Florida state agencies, FEMA and the U.S. Small Business Administration. Survivors can get help applying for federal assistance and disaster loans, update applications and learn about other resources available.
Other centers are operating in the following locations, 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. seven days a week unless otherwise noted.
CHARLOTTE COUNTY
Tringali Rec Center, 3450 N Access Rd., Englewood, FL 34224
Hours: 8 a.m. to 7 p.m. daily.
COLLIER COUNTY
Veterans Community Park, 1895 Veterans Park Dr., Naples, FL 34109
DESOTO COUNTY
DeSoto Library: 125 N Hillsborough Ave., Arcadia, Fl 34266
Hours: 8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
HARDEE COUNTY
Wauchula Civic Center, 515 Civic Center Dr., Wauchula, FL 33873
HIGHLANDS COUNTY
Highlands County Extension Office, 4509 George Blvd., Sebring, FL 33875
LAKE COUNTY
First Baptist Church of Astor Lake County, 24731 Ann St., Astor, FL 32102
LEE COUNTY
Lakes Regional Library, 15290 Bass Rd., Fort Myers, FL 33919
Hours: 8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
LEE COUNTY
Fort Myers DMS Building, 2295 Victoria Ave., Fort Myers, FL 33901
Hours: 8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
ORANGE COUNTY
Barnett Park, 4801 W. Colonial Dr., Orlando, FL 32808
OSCEOLA COUNTY
Hart Memorial Central Library, 211 E. Dakin Ave., Kissimmee, FL 34741
POLK COUNTY
W.H. Stuart Center, 1702 S. Holland Pkwy., Bartow, FL 33830
SARASOTA COUNTY
Shannon Staub Public Library, 4675 Career La., North Port, FL 34289
SEMINOLE COUNTY
Seminole State College - Barbara Miller Automotive Center, 100 Weldon Blvd., Sanford, FL 32773
ST. JOHNS COUNTY
Wind Mitigation Building, 3111 Agricultural Center Dr., St. Augustine, FL 32092
VOLUSIA COUNTY
Volusia County Health Department, 1845 Holsonback Dr., Daytona Beach, FL 32117
U.S. Housing and Urban Development
The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) also offers disaster recovery assistance following Presidentially declared disasters. Read more from HUD HERE.
Reemployment Assistance
Disaster Unemployment Assistance (DUA) may be available to Florida businesses and residents in FEMA disaster-declared counties whose employment or self-employment was lost or interrupted as a direct result of Hurricane Ian. Individuals must file for state Reemployment Assistance benefits before filing for DUA. During the application, claimants should indicate they have been impacted by the disaster. Learn more HERE. Apply HERE.
Transitional Sheltering Assistance
The state of Florida and FEMA have activated the Transitional Sheltering Assistance (TSA) program for Hurricane Ian survivors in Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Flagler, Hardee, Highlands, Hillsborough, Lake, Lee, Manatee, Orange, Osceola, Pinellas, Polk, Putnam, Sarasota, Seminole, St. Johns and Volusia counties. Survivors from these counties who have applied for disaster assistance may be eligible to shelter in a hotel or motel paid for by FEMA. Survivors will be notified of their eligibility through a phone call, text message and/or email from FEMA.
Critical Needs Assistance
FEMA may provide financial assistance to applicants who have immediate or critical needs because they are displaced from their primary dwelling. Immediate or critical needs are lifesaving and life-sustaining items, including water, food, first aid, prescriptions, infant formula, diapers, consumable medical supplies, durable medical equipment, personal hygiene items and fuel for transportation. This assistance is available for applicants with primary residences in the 26 counties designated for Individual Assistance.
Operation Blue Roof, Temporary Roof Repair
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, in coordination with FEMA, may be able to assist eligible homeowners with temporary roof repairs. Operation Blue Roof is a free service to homeowners impacted by Hurricane Ian in Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Lee, and Sarasota counties. Homeowners can sign up online at blueroof.us or call 1-888-ROOF-BLU (1-888-766-3258) for more information.
Public Assistance
Orange and Osceola counties are now eligible for FEMA Public Assistance for the repair or replacement of disaster-damaged public facilities. Other counties include: Brevard, Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Flagler, Glades, Hardee, Hendry, Highlands, Hillsborough, Indian River, Lake, Lee, Manatee, Monroe, Okeechobee, Orange, Osceola, Polk, Putnam, Sarasota, Seminole, St. Johns, Sumter, Volusia. Learn more HERE https://www.fema.gov/disaster/4673/designated-areas#individual-assistance and HERE https://www.fema.gov/assistance/public.
Individual Assistance
FEMA has made individual assistance available to 26 counties in Florida. Residents in Brevard, Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Flagler, Glades, Hardee, Hendry, Highlands, Hillsborough, Lake, Lee, Manatee, Monroe, Okeechobee, Orange, Osceola, Palm Beach, Pasco, Pinellas, Polk, Putnam, Sarasota, Seminole, St. Johns and Volusia counties are eligible to apply for Individual Assistance.
Disaster Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
The U.S. Department of Agriculture announced that low-income Florida residents recovering from Hurricane Ian could be eligible for assistance from the USDA's Disaster Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (D-SNAP). Details on Florida's D-SNAP program will be available at the Florida Department of Children and Families' Hurricane Ian Response and Recovery website. D-SNAP sites will be posted on the website as they become available.
Helpful Resources for Businesses:
U.S. Small Business Administration
Following a Presidential Disaster Declaration, the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) provides low-interest disaster loans to help businesses and homeowners recover from declared disasters. Eligible counties include those in the federal Disaster Declaration, as well as the contiguous counties. Learn more HERE.
For information on tax relief in disaster situations from the IRS go to:.
SBA Business Recovery Centers
Long-term, low-interest disaster loans for homeowners, renters, businesses and nonprofit organizations from the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) are available to cover losses not fully compensated by insurance and other sources. Apply online using the Electronic Loan Application (ELA) via the SBA's secure website at disasterloanassistance.sba.gov/ela/s/. Disaster loan information and application forms can also be obtained by calling the SBA's Customer Service Center at 800-659-2955. Business Recovery Center are operating in impacted areas.
Chloe Coney Urban Enterprise Center, 1907 E. Hillsborough Ave., Tampa, FL 33610
o Hours: Monday - Sunday 9 a.m. to 5 p.m.
SWFL, Inc Office, 25071 Chamber of Commerce Dr., Bonita Springs, FL 34135
o Hours: Monday - Sunday, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m.
The Naples Players at Sugden Community Theatre, 701 5th Ave. South, Naples, FL 34102
o Hours: Monday 9 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Tuesday - Sunday, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Sanford Welcome Center, 230 E 1st St., Sanford, FL 32771
o Hours: Monday - Sunday 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Kiwanis Club of Cape Coral, 360 Santa Barbara Blvd. S., Cape Coral FL 33991
o Hours: Monday - Thursday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., Closed: Friday, Saturday and Sunday
Florida Small Business Emergency Bridge Loan Program:
At the state level, the Florida Department of Economic Opportunity (DEO) has activated the Florida Small Business Emergency Bridge Loan (EBL) Program. The loan program provides short-term, zero-interest loans to small businesses who experienced economic injury or physical damage due to Hurricane Ian. Loans approved through the Emergency Bridge Loan Program are intended to "bridge the gap" between the time a disaster impacts a business and when a business has secured longer term recovery funding, such as federally or commercially available loans, insurance claims, or other resources.
Eligible small businesses with two to 100 employees may apply for loans of up to $50,000 through the program. Businesses must also be located in Florida, have been established prior to September 24, 2022, be located in an eligible county, must have been economically or physically damaged by Hurricane Ian, have a credit score of 600 or above, and must have repaid all outstanding EBLs. Visit www.FloridaJobs.org/EBL to learn more about the program, as well as to view the lending guidelines and required documentation and to complete an application by the December 2, 2022, deadline.
Florida Department of Economic Opportunity
The Florida Department of Economic Opportunity's website floridadisaster.biz provides information about preparing, responding to and recovering from a disaster. The Florida Department of Economic Opportunity (DEO) and the State Emergency Response Team (SERT) activated the Business Damage Assessment Survey in response to Hurricane Ian. Survey responses will allow the state to expedite Hurricane Ian recovery efforts by gathering data and assessing the needs of affected businesses.
Additional Resources:
* Food and Water. As information becomes available, Floridians in need of food and water can find a nearby point of distribution location HERE. Storms can affect public water treatment plants, water lines and private wells - citizens affected by the storms must err on the side of caution until their water is tested. Learn about Boil Water Notices from the Florida Department of Health HERE.
* Medications. Early prescription refills are permitted during a state-declared State of Emergency. Learn more from the Florida Department of Health HERE.
* Shelter. Shelters are currently open and available and locations can be found HERE, or through the American Red Cross HERE, or by calling 1-800-RED CROSS (1-800-733-2767).
* Mental Health Resources. You are not alone. If you are in need of support through any disaster, crisis or circumstance, please reach out. Florida 211 connects individuals to local helpline call centers that have crisis counselors for disaster recovery and can provide information on access to local resources such as housing, food and health care. Connect by phone 24/7 by dialing: 2-1-1.
* Also, the Disaster Distress Helpline is a national helpline that provides crisis support services for individuals in emotional distress that are impacted by disaster. Connect by phone 24/7 by calling or texting 1-800-985-5990.
* Price Gouging Hotline. Florida Attorney General Moody's Price Gouging Hotline remains open for Floridians statewide to report instances of severe price increases on essential commodities needed to prepare for the storm. Florida's price gouging law only applies to commodities and services essential to preparing for, or recovering from, a storm during a declared state of emergency. If you feel you have been a victim of price gouging, report online HERE, by calling 1-866-9NO-SCAM, or by downloading the NO SCAM app.
Helpful Reminders:
* Use extreme caution when operating heavy machinery, generators, or while removing debris. Never use generators indoors and keep them away from windows, doors and vents.
* Wear sturdy shoes or boots when walking on, or near, debris. Wear long sleeves and gloves when handling debris.
* Be careful during clean-up. Wear protective clothing, use appropriate face coverings or masks if cleaning mold or other debris, and maintain a physical distance of at least six feet while working with someone else. People with asthma and other lung conditions and/or immune suppression should not enter buildings with indoor water leaks or mold growth that can be seen or smelled, even if they do not have an allergy to mold.
* When clearing debris from a property, know the location of all utilities, both underground and overhead to prevent injury. Do not place items in front of, around or on top of buried and above ground utilities.
* Use caution around any buried utilities. Cutting vital communications assets such as fiber optic lines can cause a loss of cellular networks, including cell phone service or access to the internet. Call 8-1-1 before digging so utilities can be marked in advance.
* Don't drive or walk through flood waters. Be aware of downed power lines, standing water and other hidden hazards.
* Stay off roads so that emergency workers are able to get through.
The following Twitter accounts, along with your local Sheriff's Office, Police Department, and County Emergency Operations Center (EOC), may be helpful for up-to-date information and resources on Hurricane Ian.
* @SenRickScott
* @FEMA
* @FEMARegion4
* @FLSERT
* @FL511_STATE
See Senator Scott's Hurricane Information webpage HERE https://www.rickscott.senate.gov/hurricane-season-resources. Senator Scott urges Floridians who were impacted by the storm to continue following guidance from their local officials. Stay up-to-date with information from your local Emergency Management officials. Impacted Floridians should not return home until the area is declared to be safe by local officials. Read more from FEMA about returning home HERE https://www.ready.gov/hurricanes#after. See the latest on Hurricane Ian response and recovery from FEMA at www.fema.gov/disaster/hurricane-ian and from the Florida Division of Emergency Management at floridadisaster.org or @FLSERT on Twitter.
Read this original document at: https://www.rickscott.senate.gov/2022/10/sen-rick-scott-shares-updated-federal-resources-guide-for-florida-families-recovering-from-major-hurricane-ian/be205ce0-e0f4-40b6-9e52-18f6ef16d6c5
Load-Date: October 23, 2022



End of Document


GOVERNOR RON DESANTIS ISSUES UPDATES ON HURRICANE IAN RECOVERY
US State News
October 21, 2022 Friday 9:32 AM  EST

Copyright 2022 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 5458 words
Body




TALLAHASSEE, Fla., Oct. 21 -- The Office of Florida Governor issued the following press release:
TALLLAHASSEE, Fla.-Today,Governor Ron DeSantis traveled to Fort Myers and First Lady Casey DeSantis traveled to Sarasota toannounce that $4 million is being distributedthrough the Florida Disaster Fund. At San Carlos Park Elementary, Governor DeSantis announced $2 million has been awarded to support local education foundations in six school districts hardest hit by the storm. To watch the Governor's full remarks, clickhere.
In Sarasota, First Lady Casey DeSantis also announced $2 million has been awarded from the Florida Disaster Fund to five organizations helping residents repair and rebuild their homes. First Lady DeSantis also unveiled Florida's partnership with Home Depot which will be providing an at-cost rate on select rebuild supplies to Team Rubicon, Southern Baptist Disaster Relief, Better Together, Samaritan's Purse and Lee BIA Builders Care. To watch the First Lady's full remarks, clickhere.
The US Army Corps of Engineers has extended the Operation Blue Roof application deadline through November 1, 2022. The program is a free service that provides homeowners with a temporary solution to protect property and allows residents to remain in their home as they continue to recover from Hurricane Ian. This program is available for homeowners in Lee, Charlotte, DeSoto, Sarasota, and Collier counties. For more information, visitblueroof.usor call 1-888-ROOF-BLU.
First Lady Casey DeSantis has continued to highlight the Florida Disaster Fundand the support it has received from private entities across the nation. The Florida Disaster Fund has raised nearly $50 million since activation. To read more, clickhere. To contribute, visitwww.FloridaDisasterFund.orgor text DISASTER to 20222.
First Lady Casey DeSantis has worked to expand mental healthin response to Hurricane Ian. The First Lady has also worked with the State Disaster Recovery Mental Health Coordinator, Sara Newhouse, to compile a comprehensive webpage of resources to help navigate available resources for mental health needs post hurricane. To visit the site, clickhere.
To guide Floridians looking for their next-steps as they rebuild,FloridaStormRelief.comserves as a one-stop-shop to navigate all available assistance. This webpage highlights the resources available through the state's public and private partners, and faith-based organizations. Here you can find a step-by-step check list for Floridians recovering following Hurricane Ian, mental health resiliency resources and ways to help Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian. This website also has a list of resources available to help your business recover following the storm.
State response efforts include:
Florida Division of Emergency Management (FDEM)
* FDEM is collecting information to assist disaster survivors who have critical unmet needs due to Hurricane Ian. Disaster survivors can fill out the voluntary Unmet Needs Resident Survey inEnglishorSpanish.
* At the request of Governor DeSantis, FDEM worked with federal partners to secure an additional 30 days of 100% federal cost share for Public Assistance Category A (debris removal) and Category B (emergency protective measures) for Hurricane Ian recovery efforts. More information can be foundhere.
* Counties eligible for FEMA Individual Assistance include Brevard, Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Flagler, Glades, Hardee, Hendry, Highlands, Hillsborough, Lake, Lee, Manatee, Monroe, Okeechobee, Orange, Osceola, Palm Beach, Pasco, Pinellas, Polk, Putnam, Sarasota, Seminole, St. Johns and Volusia. . As of October 20, there were 663,097 valid registrations with more than $545 million approved. Impacted residents can apply atDisasterAssistance.govor visit an openDisaster Recovery Center (DRC).
* FDEM has worked with FEMA to activate the Transitional Sheltering Assistance (TSA) Program for impacted residents in counties declared for FEMA Individual Assistance. Nearly 300 hotels are being utilized in the TSA program. Individuals are encouraged to apply for disaster assistance and may be eligible for TSA if they cannot return to their home.
* FDEM has also worked with the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) to make long-term, low-interest disaster loans available to homeowners, renters, businesses and nonprofit organizations to cover losses not fully compensated by insurance and other sources. As of October 20, more than $130 million has been approved. Individuals can apply online using the Electronic Loan Application on the SBA's secure website atDisasterLoanAssistance.SBA.gov. Information and applications can also be obtained by calling 800-659-2955 or by visiting aBusiness Recovery Center
* FDEM is mobilizing generators and water pumps for Sanibel Island as infrastructure inspections are completed and facilities can begin operation.
* FDEM is working with St. Augustine maintenance crews to begin restoration of impacted dunes to be completed before turtle nesting season.
* Nearly 500 STARLINK Units have been distributed to businesses and responders in impacted communities to provide Internet connection.
* FDEM has authorized 303 Debris Management Sites to reduce and remove debris from impacted areas.
* FDEM is working with the Lee County School District to provide solutions on temporary repairs and ensure schools reopen as soon as possible for students.
Power
* Power has been restored to all accounts on the mainland which can receive it.
* As of today, over 97% of accounts that can receive power on Pine Island have been restored, significantly ahead of the estimated restoration timeline.
* For a full report on current outages, clickhere.
Internet Connectivity
* If you are a Xfinity customer experiencing internet connectivity issues and you live in a predominately restored location and find that after restarting your modem your services are still not working, the lines delivering service to your home may be damaged. Please go to theStatus Centerto troubleshoot or use yourXfinity Appto chat with a representative or call 1-800-XFINITY (1-800-934-6489) to report your service interruption.
* AT&T is waiving talk, text, and data overage charges for AT&T Postpaid & PREPAID customers with billing addresses in 828 zip codes across Florida from September 28, 2022, through October 28, 2022, to keep customers connected before, during and after any major storm event. AT&T is welcoming other carriers' customers to roam on its networks so they can connect, even if their carrier's service isn't available after the storm. Since opening the AT&T network last week for roaming, we've handled about 47 TBs of traffic from other carriers to help keep those in impacted areas connected. 47 TBs of data is equal to more than 16 billion text messages. Store locations and hours are available atwww.att.com/stores.
* Comcast has Xfinity WiFi vans provide free internet connectivity as communities continue to recover from Hurricane Ian. Each Xfinity WiFi van can provide wireless internet connectivity to more than 1,000 users at one time over a 300-square-foot area. The vans will be available from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily at the following locations until further notice:
* Cape Coral: Walmart Supercenter, 1619 Del Prado Boulevard South, Cape Coral, FL
* Bonita Springs: Bonita Springs Public Library, 2687 Pine Ave., Bonita Springs, FL
* Fort Myers: Walmart Supercenter, 17105 San Carlos Blvd., Fort Myers, FL
* Port Charlotte: Walmart Neighborhood Market (Charlotte Square) at 2150 Tamiami Trail, Port Charlotte, FL
* As residents of Southwest Florida recover, Verizon is extending its support for counties most impacted by Hurricane Ian. Consumer and small business customers in the following counties will continue to receive unlimited calling, texting, and mobile data through October 31, 2022, in Charlotte, Collier, Desoto, Hardee, Lee, and Sarasota counties.Verizon has deployed Wireless Emergency Connection Centers (WECCs) to assist Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian with wi-fi, phone batteries, and charging stations. These stations are available to any customer of any carrier stay connected. WECCs are available at the following locations:
* Fort Myers Town Hall, 2525 Estero Boulevard, Fort Myers Beach, FL
* Lakes Regional Library 15290 Bass Road, Fort Myers, FL
* Fishers of Men Lutheran Church, 10360 Stringfellow Rd, St James City, FL
* Additionally, charging pedestals are available at the following locations:
* Estero Community Center, 9200 Corkscrew Palms Boulevard, Estero, FL 33928
* North Collier Regional Park, 15000 Livingston Road, Naples, FL 34116
Health and Human Services
* DOH and DCF partnered with BetterHelp to offer three months of free mental health services via online therapy to those impacted by Hurricane Ian. To access these free services, visitbetterhelp.com/voucherand enter code:HurricaneIan. Visitors to BetterHelp's site will be prompted to answer a questionnaire that will match those impacted residents with a licensed mental health professional.
* Boil Water Noticeshave been issued for 31 areas, over 9 counties, DOH continues to monitor and maintain acomprehensive statewide list of noticesfor residents to access online.
* DOH's Division of Disease Control and Health Protection has deployed an environmental health strike team in Seminole County to assist with private well water testing at flood impacted homes.
* DOH County Health Departments have been deployed to all Disaster Recovery Centers to provide services and resources. This includes Women and Infant Care, Vital Statistics, and other public health services. Costs for any vital statistics, such as birth and death certificates, have been waived.
* DOH's Division of Children's Medical Services' Early Steps and Newborn Screening programs has sent additional supplies to Ft. Myers. Nearly 1,000 waterproof bags with essential supplies including hand sanitizer, silicone bibs, thermometers, baby spoons, and cooling towels for moms and babies to be distributed to families in impacted communities.
* 102 clients have received weather-related Emergency Home Assistance for the Elder Program funds to assist with individuals experiencing a home energy emergency in the affected areas.
Infrastructure
* All accessible State-owned bridges have been inspected across Florida. FDOT continues to assist with inspections on locally owned bridges.
* Access restored to Pine Island Bridge in just over 50 hours/ under 3 days.
* Access restored to Sanibel Causeway in 15 days - 10 days ahead of schedule.
* Access restored to Sanibel Causeway in 15 days- 10 days ahead of schedule.
* Florida Tolls reinstated at 6 a.m. on Saturday, October 15, with the exception of Alligator Alley, Pinellas Bayway, and Sunshine Skyway. Tolls at those three facilities remain suspended.
* Initial debris pick-up:
* 4,456 miles of state roads have been completed statewide.
* Statewide 89,420 cubic yards of vegetation debris have been picked up.
Roadways (state roads & interstates)
* Roads Closed as of 11 a.m. on 10/21/22
* Brevard County
* SR-46 Westbound at Hatbill Road - Lane closed
* DeSoto County
* NW 2nd Bunker Avenue at Arrowhead Pond Road - Lane closed, both directions
* SR-72 Westbound beyond SR-70 - All Lanes closed
* SR-72 from NW Pearce Street to SR-70 - Lane closed
* Hardee County
* SR-64 from Brantwood Drive to Wilbur C King Boulevard - Lane closed, both directions
* Polk County
* E Grove Avenue at S Scenic Highway - Lane closed, both directions
* Seminole County
* SR-46 Eastbound at N Jungle Road - Lane close
Freight Rail
* Seminole Gulf Railway sustained significant damage. Damage assessments continue and repair plans are underway. They are operating on their Sarasota line.
Mass Care
* DCF launched the Disaster Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (D-SNAP), which is being implemented in phases by county. Phase one includes Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Hardee, Lee, Polk, and Sarasota counties. Phase two includes Flagler, Highlands, Manatee, Orange, Pinellas, and St. Johns. Pre-registration is required by all applicants.
* As of October 19, 140,634 households have pre-registered.To expedite service to eligible households, DCF is offering phone interviews through the D-SNAP Call Center. Details can be found online atMyFLFamilies.com/DSNAP.
* As of October 19, DCF has disbursed $41 million.
* DBPR investigators and other staffers from across the state are at all the Disaster Recovery Centers in Charlotte, Collier, Lee and Sarasota Counties, helping with any licensing needs and educating the public about the importance of hiring a licensed contractor.
* Area Agency on Aging staff have been serving older Floridians at Disaster Recovery Centers. To date, 248 seniors have been assisted through the DRCs.
* Senior Resource Alliance, serving Orange, Osceola, Seminole, and Brevard, and their providers are helping displaced seniors that are currently living in a hotel in Kissimmee. Services include a congregate meal site at the hotel, help with FEMA applications and legal issues, transportation, and distribution of snacks, water, clothing, and supplies.
* DOEA now has 231 registered Hope Heroes. Volunteer opportunities and requests for donated items and services to help seniors affected by Hurricane Ian are going out daily. To join the mission, visit helpcreatehope.com.
* DCF hastwo new FamilyResource Support Centers inDeltona and New Smyrna Beach. FRSCs are staffed with Hope Navigators, crisis counselors who specialize in disaster recovery response, and public benefit eligibility specialists to help individuals and families. More information can be found atMyFLFamilies.com/FRSC.
* Florida Housing Finance Corporation has updated its Disaster Relief webpage to provide families with information on housing resources and assistance. This webpage will continue to be updated as more information becomes available.Disaster Relief Resources and Information (floridahousing.org).
Law Enforcement
* DCF has created a First Responder Support Line (407-823-1657) that all first responders throughout the impacted areas can contact. This line combines current resources into a single point of contact that will connect first responders with mental health professionals.
* FLHSMV has deployed Florida Licensing on Wheels (FLOW) mobile units to Lee, Charlotte, Sarasota, and Collier counties to provide no-fee replacements for driver license and identification credentials, vehicle registrations, and titles.
* Dates, locations, and hours of operation for FLOW mobiles are subject to change and will be announced onFLHSMV.gov.
* FLOW Locations:
* Sarasota County
* Disaster Recovery Center
* Shannon Staub Library
* 4675 Career Lane, North Port, FL 34289
* Lee County
* Disaster Recovery Center
* Lakes Regional Library
* 15290 Bass Road, Fort Myers, FL 33919
* Disaster Recovery Center
* Joseph P. D'Alessandro Office Complex
* 2295 Victoria Ave., Fort Myers, FL 33901
* Del Tura Plaza
* 18900 North Tamiami Trail, North Fort Myers, FL 33903
* Charlotte County
* Port Charlotte Town Center
* 1441 Tamiami Trail, Port Charlotte, FL 33948
* Collier County
* Disaster Recovery Center
* Veterans Community Park
* 1895 Veterans Park Dr, Naples, FL 3411
* FLOW Hours of Operation: 9:00am - 6:00pm, seven days a wee
* As of October 20, more than 4,800 customers have been served since operations began.
* FDLE has four response teams and one logistical support team deployed in Lee and Charlotte counties checking in law enforcement officers reporting for duty, maintaining the base camps and matching law enforcement resources to the identified needs.
* FHP's fixed-wing aircraft and unmanned aerial systems are aiding in FDOT's efforts as they continue to undertake bridge and other infrastructure repairs.
* FHP continues to provide escorts for fuel, utility, and emergency response teams to provide critical resources to the impacted areas.
* FHP is assisting multiple local agencies with law enforcement functions in the impacted areas.
* More than 1,700 sworn FHP members are available to assist with enhanced response efforts.
* Peer support is available 24/7 to all FHP members and their families through FHP's Peer Support Team and the FHP Wellness App to support their overall wellness.
* FHP encourages motorists to report disabled vehicles or dangerous driving conditions to *FHP (*347).
* FLHSMV driver license and motor vehicle service center closures can be foundhere.
* FLHSMV has issued Emergency Order092422, which:
* Waives specific requirements for commercial motor vehicles providing emergency relief; and
* Waives the replacement fees for driver's license and identification credentials, vehicle registrations and titles, vessel registrations and titles and temporary parking permits for impacted individuals.
* The FWC has established a field base of operations in Lee County and deployed two mobile command centers and 6 BERG units to provide communications and operational support to officers in the area while they respond to calls for assistance.
* Approximately 52 FWC officers and support personnel are currently deployed for Hurricane Ian response and recovery efforts with a full complement of four-wheel drive vehicles, vessels and response and recovery equipment and supplies have arrived in Lee County.
* 17 FWC officers from across the state have deployed to assess and process thousands of vessels displaced due to the storm.
* The FWC has established a Hurricane Ian Vessel Hotline for vessel and property owners affected by vessels displaced by Hurricane Ian. More than 1,300 vessels have been assessed by displaced vessel teams.
* For more information about displaced vessels or derelict vessels in state waters call 850-488-5600.
* FWC cautions all boaters to exercise extreme caution in waterways in areas affected by Hurricane Ian and encourages boaters to report missing or damaged waterway markers by calling 866-405-2869 or by filling out an online form at:https://myfwc.com/boating/waterway/markers/damaged-or-missing/.
Private Sector Support
* Florida was approved for $30 million for the National Dislocated Worker Grant for Floridians without work due to Hurricane Ian, which DEO applied for through the U.S. Department of Labor on October 4, 2022.
* DEO staff and volunteers are providing in-person services and surging resources to five Disaster Recover Center locations located in Lee, Charlotte, Sarasota, and Collier Counties. Locations for DRCs are available onwww.FloridaDisaster.org.
* Business Recovery Centers, represented by the U.S. Small Business Administration and the Florida Small Business Development Center network. Visitwww.FloridaSBDC.org/disaster/loan-assistance/to find a location near you.
* Uber is offering free round-trip rides, up to $30 each way, to and from 10 state-approved Disaster Recovery Centers (DRC). At these centers, those whose livelihoods have been severely affected by Hurricane Ian will be able to apply for federal assistance and disaster loans, update applications, and learn about other resources available. Details on how to redeem a free round trip, up to $30 each way, to and from a state-approved DRC are available atwww.FloridaDisaster.biz/CurrentDisasterUpdates.
* Work search reporting and other requirements for Reemployment Assistance claims have been temporarily waived for Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian in FEMA disaster-declared counties.Eligible Floridians must file for regular state Reemployment Assistance benefits before applying for Disaster Unemployment Assistance (DUA). DUA is available for individuals and businesses in FEMA disaster-declared counties. Learn morehere.
* Over 15,900 DUA claims have been submitted since DUA was activated and more than 7,800 have been approved.
* To support Floridians during this time, DEO has deployed personnel to the field and extended call center hours to seven days per week. Additionally, DEO secured sixID.mekiosks and support technicians to reduce the number of fraudulent claims. DEO is expanding the number of agents available to review and process claims.
* DEO and CareerSource Florida have activated thedisaster recovery jobs portal to connect businesses and people impacted by Hurricane Ian with workforce programs. To look for employment opportunities or post disaster-related jobs to help rebuild Florida's communities impacted by Hurricane Ian, visit Florida's Disaster Recovery Jobs Portalatdisasterrecovery.employflorida.com.
* CareerSource Florida is working with DEO to support recovery efforts and help connect affected residents with temporary employment. All career centers are open statewide. To find your local career center, visitFind Your Local Teamor Career Center Directory.
* CareerSource South Florida and CareerSource Pasco Hernando locations have deployed mobile units to the Fort Myers Disaster Recovery Center.
* CareerSource Southwest Florida has deployed volunteers to the Disaster Recovery Center to assist impacted individuals.
* The Florida Small Business Emergency Bridge Loan Program has been activated to assist small businesses that have been impacted by Hurricane Ian with short-term, zero-interest loans to meet the businesses' immediate financial needs and "bridge the gap" until longer term funding sources become available. Small businesses in the most impacted counties will be escalated and prioritized as they are received. Visitwww.FloridaJobs.org/EBLto learn more.
* An eligibility requirement of the Florida Small Business Emergency Bridge Loan Program was waived to allow sole proprietors in the Marine Fisheries Industry with businesses located in Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Hardee, Lee, and Sarasota counties to receive critical assistance. Learn morehere.
* DEO is updatingwww.FloridaDisaster.bizwith real-time information for business owners, their families, and employees for Hurricane Ian.
* DEO's Rebuild Florida team continues to work with homeowners to assess any damage that may have occurred to Hurricane Irma projects from Hurricane Ian. The team continues to rotate deployed staff to Ian-impacted areas, supporting recovery efforts.
* Enterprise Florida activated itsDisaster Assistance pagewith a list of state and federal resources available for businesses to utilize in their mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery activities.
* Airbnb has launched a special website to help Hurricane Ian Relocation efforts for impacted residents atAirbnb.com/hurricaneianflorida. The page features open (vacant and available for rent) properties that are availableto be booked outside of the FEMA Disaster zones. As communities become fully restored with water and electricity, Airbnb will add more open properties.
* For displaced residents of Lee and Charlotte counties,Airbnbis also working with their nonprofit partners to offer vouchers for temporary housing at Airbnb properties. To learn more about how the voucher program works, see Airbnb's full press release athttps://news.airbnb.com/airbnb-org-hurricane-relief-efforts/.
Florida Department of Education (DOE)
* All school districts impacted by Hurricane Ian have opened, less than three weeks after Hurricane Ian made landfall. More info can be foundhere.
Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
* DEP is coordinating with FWC and USCG on derelict/displaced vessels.
* DEP landfill strike team members along with EPA On-Scene Coordinator staff continue DDMS/Debris inspections.
* 301 Disaster Debris Management Sites have been authorized to operate for Hurricane Ian, including 70 in Lee, Charlotte and Sarasota counties. These sites are a critical component of expediting clean-up, reducing environmental and public health impacts, and meeting federal reimbursement requirements.
* DEP staff are on the ground assessing water and wastewater infrastructure on some of the hardest hit areas Fort Myers Beach, Pine Island, Sanibel Island and Gasparilla Island, with resources from FlaWARN, US Army Corps of Engineers, local utilities and the Division of Emergency Management's contractor.
* DEP is coordinating with FlaWARN and other response agencies on the dispatch of generators, fuel and pump trucks to assist drinking water and wastewater facilities to help get them operational as soon as possible.
* Hazardous Area Response Teams have been deployed to aid with assessment and resources for addressing impacts to hazardous waste facilities in impacted areas.
* Following the issuance of the Governor's Executive Order, DEP issued anEmergency Final Orderwaiving permitting requirements for the storage and processing of solid waste, including storm debris.
* DEP has also issued anEmergency Final Orderto expedite necessary repair, replacement and restoration of structures, equipment, surface water management systems, works and other systems damaged by the storm.
Licensing
* DOH's Board of Clinical Social Work, Marriage and Family Therapy, and Mental Health Counseling is increasing resources to expedite processing of licensure applications, ensuring greater availability of qualified mental health professionals.
* DBPR Emergency Order 2022-04waives the application fees associated with relocating or reopening certain businesses, including the addition of branch locations regulated by the Department or by any board, commission or division of the Department, where relocation or reopening arises from damages caused by Hurricane Ian in the listed counties.
* DBPR Emergency Order 2022-03waives the requirement for certified or registered, general, building, or residential contractors to subcontract roofing work for the repair or installation of any roof type in listed counties.
* Temporary Veterinarian License Application:The Florida Board of Veterinary Medicine has a30-Day Temporary Veterinarian Licenseavailable to out-of-state veterinarians who do not currently hold a Florida Veterinary License but wish to come to Florida to provide relief veterinary services.
* Florida licensed veterinarians interested in offering volunteer services should contact the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services,Florida Vet Corpfor information at 1-800-HELP-FLA (1-800-435-7352).
* Food Industry Bulletins:DBPR has publishedEmergency Recovery GuidelinesandBoil Water Notice Guidelineson our website, and DBPR's Division of Hotels and Restaurants is distributing the notices to licensed businesses in impacted areas.
* DBPREmergency Order 2022-01extends the renewal deadline from September 30 or October 1, 2022, to October 31, 2022, for multiple licenses.
* DBPR Emergency Order 2022-01 also extends the deadline for the filing of monthly reports and returns by certain alcoholic beverage and tobacco license holders from October 10, 2022, to October 31, 2022. Additionally, the order suspends and tolls through October 31, 2022, all final orders reflecting final agency action and all time requirements and deadlines for filing responses outlined in agency orders.
* DBPR's Division of Drugs, Devices and Cosmetics is coordinating with wholesale distributors of prescription drugs and medical gases to provide information and support relating to exceptions for the emergency distribution of these critical supplies where needed.
Insurance
* OIR is requiring insurers to report preliminary catastrophe claims for Hurricane Ian. To date, insurers have reported a total of $ 6,611,269,392 in estimated insured losses and a total of 564,399 claims. This aggregate information is compiled from claims data filed by insurers, it has not been audited or independently verified. Additional claim data and information can be found on OIR's Hurricane Ian information pagehere.
* On October 17, 2022, the Department of Revenue issued Emergency Order #22-003, extending certain filing due dates for Florida businesses located in counties impacted by Hurricane Ian. The order extends September 2022 and October 2022 reporting periods for sales and use tax, reemployment tax and several other tax types to November 23, 2022 for the six counties in southwest Florida where Hurricane Ian made landfall: Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Hardee, Lee, and Sarasota. Those businesses affected by this order or impacted by the storm who have questions regarding the order may contact Taxpayer Services at (850) 488-6800 or by email atGTAHurricaneHelp@Floridarevenue.com
* OIR issuedEmergency Order 300997-22-EOin response to Hurricane Ian regarding the extension of grace periods, limitations on cancellations and nonrenewals, deemers and limitations on "use and file" filings. This Emergency Order is issued to protect the public health, safety and welfare of all Florida policyholders.
* OIR instituted a data call for the purpose of collecting catastrophe claims data related to Hurricane Ian. OIR is requiring daily catastrophe claims reporting for Hurricane Ian starting Friday, September 30 to assist with determining the impact of Hurricane Ian on Florida's insurance industry. More information regarding catastrophe claims data and reporting is availablehere.
Florida Main Street Program
* The Florida Department of State, Division of Historical Resources', Florida Main Street Program has been in contact with Florida Main Street communities impacted by Hurricane Ian to mitigate damage to these communities and historic properties.
* Additionally, The Florida Main Street Program has paired up communities that were affected by Hurricane Ian with mentors who were successful in rehabilitation after Hurricane Michael to provide pragmatic experience about ways to move forward and recover after disaster.
Elections Update
* At the request of the Supervisors of Elections in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties, and at the recommendation of Secretary of State Cord Byrd, the Governor signed Executive Order 22-234, which will help ensure adequate access to Florida's 2022 General Election ballot for the voters of Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties.
* The Governor's Executive Order includes provisions authorizing the Supervisors of Elections in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties to:
* Extend the number of days for early voting and designate additional early voting locations. The early voting period may begin as early as Monday, October 24, 2022, and can extend through Election Day, November 8, 2022.
* Allow voters in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties to request by phone that their vote-by-mail (VBM) ballot be mailed to an address other than their address of record. Voters must still provide an appropriate form of identification in the same manner as absent uniform service and overseas voters.
* Designate and provide notice of the locations for secure ballot intake stations and relocate and consolidate polling locations as necessary.
* Increase the pool of eligible poll workers who may serve within Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties by making eligible any poll workers previously trained for the 2020 election cycle and thereafter and by encouraging state employees to serve as poll workers in these counties.
* Governor DeSantis also directed all state agencies to render aid and assistance as needed by the Supervisors of Elections in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties. Secretary Byrd and the Department of State assessed the need for these provisions based on extensive outreach to Florida's Supervisors of Elections:
* Secretary Byrd and the Division of Elections leadership conducted continuous outreach and assessed the needs and readiness of counties in or around Hurricane Ian's path, including: Charlotte, Citrus, Collier, DeSoto, Dixie, Flagler, Gilchrist, Hardee, Hernando, Highlands, Hillsborough, Lafayette, Lake, Lee, Levy, Manatee, Orange, Osceola, Pasco, Pinellas, Polk, Putnam, Sarasota, Seminole, St. Johns, Taylor, and Volusia counties. Secretary Byrd also personally visited the hardest hit areas, including Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Lee, Hardee, and Sarasota counties to meet with their Supervisors of Elections in-person.
* Furthermore, Secretary Byrd participated in discussions with the Florida Supervisors of Elections (FSE). The FSE is a nonprofit association representing the Supervisors of Elections from all of Florida's 67 counties.
* Lastly, since Hurricane Ian made landfall, numerous Supervisors of Elections have publicly addressed their readiness, and thankfully most have very publicly stated that Ian's impacts will not interfere with their duties. This is a testament to the resiliency of Florida's elections system.
Search and Rescue
* There have been 2,500 rescues made to date.
* More than 1,000 team members performed search and rescue.
* The Florida National Guard cleared 51.5 miles in the impacted area. Guardsmen continue to assist law enforcement with roving patrols, security, traffic control and curfew enforcement missions.
### For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
Load-Date: October 22, 2022



End of Document


JBPHH BOIL WATER ADVISORY LIFTED
US Fed News
October 21, 2022 Friday 8:03 AM  EST

Copyright 2022 HT Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Length: 271 words
Body




JOINT BASE PEARL HARBOR-HICKAM, Oct. 21 -- Commander, U.S. Naval Forces Korea, issued the following news release:
"Based on those results residents on the Joint Base water system no longer have to boil their water before consumption", said CAPT Mark Sohaney, Joint Base commander. "I appreciate everyone's patience and understanding while we worked to restore our water system to normal."
As the system returns to full functionality, residents may initially see sediment in their water. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends water system users flush their water lines for five minutes after the boil water advisory has been lifted. Users should also empty their ice bins, and allow them to completely fill. Throw away that next batch of ice, then clean the ice bin with cleaning agent.
Bottled water distribution sites will cease operations at 6:00 pm. tonight, after having distributed approximately 170,000 gallons of bottled water to Joint Base residents and other locations on the Navy's water system.
"We could not have responded in such a timely manner without the assistance of multiple county, state, federal and private agencies who were working with us from the beginning. I can't thank them enough," said Sohaney. The following agencies were instrumental in helping to distribute water or restore the water system to full functionality: FEMA, 25th Infantry Division, Department of Education, Department of Health, BWS, local commercial water vendors and contractors. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
Load-Date: October 21, 2022



End of Document


Road to climate gains could be a rocky one; Promised progress may come, but some experts see cracks in more ambitious goals
USA Today
October 21, 2022 Friday
1 Edition

Copyright 2022 USA Today All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 2660 words
Byline: By, Kyle Bagenstose, USA TODAY
Body




When President Joe Biden signed the $1.2 trillion Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act last November - commonly known as the bipartisan infrastructure bill - he and other proponents noted it would be the largest investment in infrastructure in a generation.
But they also promised it would be something else: a historic effort to tackle climate change. Although it didn't devote hundreds of billions of dollars directly to the climate fight as the Inflation Reduction Act did this year, the administration said the infrastructure bill would help transition the nation to cleaner sources of energy while electrifying the transportation sector and preparing roads and bridges for a changing world.
"President Biden's Bipartisan Infrastructure Deal passed by Congress will strengthen our nation's resilience to extreme weather and climate change while reducing greenhouse gas emissions, expanding access to clean drinking water, building up a clean power grid, and more,"  the White House asserted in November 2021.
Promises were numerous:
Roads and bridges: $110 billion to "repair and rebuild our roads and bridges with a focus on climate change mitigation, resilience, equity, and safety."
More public transit: $105 billion for public transit and rail, which would "eliminate the Amtrak maintenance backlog" and otherwise cut  greenhouse gas emissions from the transportation sector by electrifying public transit.
Better grid: $65 billion for "the largest investment in clean energy transmission and the electric grid in American history."
Cleaner water: $15 billion to "replace all of the nation's lead pipes and service lines" and about $35 billion more to further upgrade drinking and wastewater infrastructure.
EV chargers: $7.5 billion to "build out the first-ever national network of EV chargers in the United States."
Experts say that as funding from the law begins to roll out, Americans will soon see upgrades like electric school buses, followed by a growing network of electric vehicle charging stations. But they also warn that funding from the bill probably won't result in dramatic changes in the way Americans and electricity move throughout the country, limiting the overall climate impact.
USA TODAY spoke to a variety of climate and transportation experts to look more closely at whether the bill's promises are meeting reality.
Transportation transformation?
Though experts said it's too early to fully judge the bill on its climate merits - spending will primarily be portioned out over five or 10 years - many agreed on two conclusions.
First, the bill is indeed historic in its commitment of money  and focus on climate. Experts said that in most cases the Biden administration is working diligently to ensure a good rollout. Among other measures, the U.S. Department of Transportation is crafting a new regulation to pair about $27 billion in funding with an effort for states to track and lower greenhouse emissions from transportation.
But others say that because of continued prioritization of roads and cars and a lack of accountability at the state level, they don't expect the bill to revolutionize the transportation or energy sectors, which together account for more than half of U.S. greenhouse gas emissions.
"Most Americans do not have access to transit or certainly not good transit," said Beth Osborne, director of the national nonprofit Transportation for America. "We have a lot of work to do."
Much of the past year was spent simply laying the groundwork for awarding the funding. Money will start to roll out this fall or early next year.
Experts say administration officials have moved swiftly to set funding stipulations that meet many climate and policy groups' wish lists. Most feel the administration is doing about all it can to ensure climate change remains a priority once money is awarded to states and cities, which will actually do the spending.
"There's still a lot to do, but they've made a lot of progress since the law was enacted," said Deron Lovaas, a senior policy  adviser with the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC), a Washington, D.C.-based nonprofit.
But experts warn the devil's in the details, and many won't be revealed until further down the line.
Early rollouts, mixed results
Of projects that have had early rollouts, results are mixed.
On one end of the spectrum, cities and schools are clamoring for money for electric school buses, generating a buzz of excitement about a rapid transition in the years ahead.
Money to replace lead service lines sits on the other side of the ledger. Experts have noted that the allocated $15billion doesn't nearly match the actual cost of replacing every lead drinking water pipe across the country.
With the first year of state-by-state funding for lead service line replacements already set in stone,  lawmakers in states like New Jersey are decrying a formula they say unfairly awards more money to some states. Because the formula was based on overall infrastructure needs instead of the number of actual lead service lines, an NRDC analysis found states like Ohio and New Jersey  get only about $100 per lead pipe, while Hawaii receives $10,000.
"It is shocking that the reported plan for the distribution of these funds gives some states thousands of dollars per pipe ... while the most impacted states are left to bear almost the entire cost of replacement themselves," New Jersey state senators Troy Singleton and Linda Greenstein wrote in a letter to the Environmental Protection Agency.
The EPA says it is working to fix its funding formula, but the problem points to  a wider truth, experts say: The bill's money is not going to fully address the nation's infrastructure and environmental challenges.
Cars are still king
Kevin DeGood, director of infrastructure policy at the nonprofit Center for American Progress, noted that the lion's share of the bill's new spending - $110billion - is earmarked for traditional infrastructure like roads and bridges.
That, in itself, can be problematic. For much of the past century, America's spending on transportation has revolved around the automobile, with interstate highway systems feasting as public transportation systems like trains and subways starved. Because cars and trucks emit large quantities of carbon dioxide, that legacy has now made transportation the largest emitter of greenhouse gases of any sector in the U.S. economy.
"So many people are locked into driving, because that's the only thing we built for," DeGood said.
That the bill continues to spend heavily on roadways signals that the automobile still reigns supreme. Further complicating the matter, DeGood said, is that the $110 billion in additional road and bridge funding is largely distributed to 52  state Department of Transportation agencies, including those in Washington, D.C., and Puerto Rico.
Those agencies have some flexibility in how they use the money,  including for public transportation. But DeGood says that historically such departments have focused on cars by expanding roadways and building new ones and that there is little to suggest this time will be different.
When state DOT administrators "wake up in the morning," DeGood said, "they think in terms of congestion and road widening."
The first year of boosted road and bridge funding has already rolled out the door, and oversight on how much is actually going to climate-friendly projects is difficult because of the slushiness of state budgets, DeGood said.
Progress on EV charging network
Reliance on the automobile can be less problematic if cars and trucks on the road are running on  electricity.
Max Baumhefner, a senior attorney with the NRDC who watches the electric vehicle space, said there's mostly good news on the effort to build out a  nationwide network of charging stations.
Although he says it will be a year or two before Americans see chargers physically installed, he adds the U.S. Department of Transportation worked swiftly to launch a National Electric Vehicle Infrastructure program, which will divvy up the $5 billion set aside for electric vehicle charging stations.
Just three months after the bill passed, the program released  guidelines for states to apply for the money. Baumhefner approves of the criteria, which he says emphasizes the installation of the latest generation of fast-charging stations located strategically along heavily traveled highways.
"Fast charging is getting a lot faster," Baumhefner said. "We're seeing a move toward charging that gets you back on the road after a cup of coffee and a bathroom break, where before it was more like stopping for lunch."
Another $2.5 billion is earmarked for a separate community grant program that Baumhefner predicts will mostly be used to build out local charging stations. The Inflation Reduction Act passed this summer offers further billions to complement charging station development.
But Baumhefner warns of a downside: Estimates show the U.S. probably will need to spend at least $40 billion on public EV charging stations just to meet its 2030 climate goals. And that doesn't include what it will cost to charge medium- and heavy-duty vehicles like tractor trailers or hit even larger 2050 targets.
"The bottom line is that it's a historic investment, but it's not alone sufficient," Baumhefner said.
Public transit, rail fall short
Osborne, with Transportation for America, says it's a similar story for public transportation and railways.
The bill allocated more money than ever for public transportation, which she says will largely address much-needed maintenance backlogs in cities and towns across the country. Although much of the money has yet to be used, Americans can expect to see lots of minor improvements in the years ahead: faster subways and trolleys as rail lines are repaired, older train cars and buses replaced with nicer new ones, and more frequent service.
Amtrak received a particularly big boost,  a nearly ninefold increase in funding from the last major transportation bill in 2015.
And perhaps the most visible transformation to Americans will be school buses. The infrastructure bill devoted $5 billion to replacing gas-powered school buses nationwide with ones running on electricity or other zero-emission fuels. In September, the EPA announced it was nearly doubling the amount of first-year funding, from $500 to $965 million, after school districts bombarded it with applications.
The agency expects to release  a list of awardees this month.
"We're working across all 50 states to accelerate the transition to a future where clean, zero-emissions school buses are the American standard," EPA Administrator Michael Regan said in a statement.
But Osborne says there are still a lot of question marks on public transportation. A simple boost in funding isn't enough on its own, she says, noting that federal and state officials still need to build out programs to  use the money. Often, such efforts can get bogged down by politics and special interests.
In one particularly thorny example, Osborne says,  Amtrak wants to upgrade passenger service along the Gulf Coast on railways owned by CSX, a private company. But she says CSX has largely rebuffed the efforts based on cost claims, and the matter is now before a federal review board. How aggressively the administration approaches the dispute could foretell how serious it is about public transit.
"There is a failure to regulate and manage the rail owners according to the law," Osborne said. "The administration has to get that straight."
And even if policies ultimately complement the funding, Osborne says, results are still mitigated by the fact that the car remains king. There's more money than ever for rail and public transit, but the same is true for roads and highways. With the latter still getting about 80% of the pie, Osborne has serious doubts on how far the needle will move in the effort to lower greenhouse gas emissions.
"It's almost entirely status quo," Osborne said. "If we really want to make a big difference on climate and equity ... we need to build tons and tons more public transit."
Long way to go for power grid
Experts say the country also needs to build vast amounts of new high-power transmission lines to support the shift to renewables and cut emissions from the energy sector, the second-largest emitter of greenhouse gases after transportation.
Rob Gramlich, president of power sector consulting firm Grid Strategies LLC, says such lines are essential to ensuring wind, solar and other green energy sources can travel vast distances to population centers. Demand for renewable energy generation is growing, as it is for electric cars and devices. But transmission lines linking the two are falling far behind.
"What that tells you is this going to be the big issue of the next few years," Gramlich said.
On paper, the infrastructure bill devoted $81 billion to the energy grid and power sector, the second-biggest pot of money after roads and bridges. In promoting the bill, the White House promised "thousands of miles of new, resilient transmission lines to facilitate the expansion of renewable energy."
But, Gramlich said, the bill provided very little funding for the actual construction of such transmission lines. Most of the power and grid money made available under the law is broken into a diverse constellation of small programs, from carbon capture infrastructure to blackout prevention to nuclear energy.
A program to fund high-voltage power lines, the Transmission Facilitation Program, received just $2.5 billion and operates on a loan basis. "That's about one month's worth of transmission spending in the country," Gramlich said. "It's marginally helpful but a far cry from anything transformative."
The thirst for water
In addition to climate change, the infrastructure bill promised to address another pressing human and environmental priority: water.
The American Society of Civil Engineers gives U.S. wastewater infrastructure a D-plus, with drinking water fairing only slightly better at a C-plus. A recent systemwide collapse that put more than 150,000 residents of Jackson, Mississippi, under a boil-water advisory highlighted the harm that can come from neglect.
The infrastructure bill promised to address such problems. It pumped about $50 billion into the water sector, about a fivefold increase over prior funding levels.
That's welcome news in cities such as El Paso, Texas, where a fresh infusion of $20 million from the bill will help pay for an advanced water recycling facility set to begin construction next year, bringing a sustainable water source to the drought-stricken city.
But advocates say that while funding in the bill is transformative for some such cities, the money will fall short across the entire country.
"I do wish people would stop calling it a once-in-a-generation bill," said Becky Hammer, deputy director of federal water policy at NRDC. "Because we need more investment this generation."
Erik Olson, a senior strategist at NRDC, said that spread over five years, new money in the bill for water infrastructure comes out to about $10 billion annually. That's a significant boost over regular funding levels, which average less than $3 billion. But with some estimates calling for more than $1 trillion to fully address the nation's water problems, that means it could still take centuries to clear a national backlog unless Congress continues to significantly increase funding.
As with money for transportation, the bill's water funding also flows through state agencies, which are subject to their own whims and often award money to politically connected and wealthy communities. Olson points to reporting around Jackson, which indicates state officials historically steered money away from the majority-Black city, to highlight the problem.
"Unless EPA and states can figure out a way around ... it's going to remain challenging to make sure this money goes to communities that need it most."
Contributing: Martha Pskowski, El Paso Times
Graphic



 
Clockwise from top left: Ellen O'Nan/The Paducah Sun via AP; PATRICK T. FALLON/AFP via Getty Images; GREG LOVETT/USA TODAY NETWORK; Nick King/USA TODAY NETWORK; Jon Austria/USA TODAY NETWORK; Ronald W. Erdrich/USA TODAY Network
Load-Date: October 21, 2022



End of Document


9 things that could have been done to prevent the Sunshine Coast's state of emergency
Newstex Blogs 
The Narwhal
October 21, 2022 Friday 10:26 PM EST

Copyright 2022 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 3315 words
Byline: Stephanie Wood
Body




Oct 21, 2022( The Narwhal: https://thenarwhal.ca Delivered by Newstex)  
 By Stephanie Wood[1]  
This story is part of Going with the Flow[2], a series that dives into how restoring nature can help with B.C.'s water problems — and what's stopping us from doing it. 
The residents of B.C.'s Sunshine Coast have reluctantly become accustomed to drought — having declared a local state of emergency for five of the past eight years due to dwindling water supply. 
This year is no different. While rain is beginning to provide some relief, the drought crisis is not going away any time soon — it's only getting worse as weather becomes more unpredictable. Many who live on the Sunshine Coast say the problem has been festering for years, and solutions have been proposed but not often pursued. 
The Sunshine Coast Regional District declared a local state of emergency on Oct. 17, which meant banning non-essential commercial water use for businesses like breweries and cement facilities. 
This came weeks after the district enacted Stage 4 water restrictions on Aug. 31, which halted all outdoor water use and barred farmers from using any water for irrigation. This has had a major impact on a region that is rich with small farms and residents who rely on home gardens as a key food source. 
Brian Smith from the Persephone Brewing Company fills a water tank on the Sunshine Coast during a Stage 4 drought last year. Photo: Shayd Johnson / The Narwhal 
The Sunshine Coast is not alone. In just the first two days of October, 33 heat records were broken across B.C. People in 'Raincouver,' which usually sees 115 millimetres of rain in October, barely saw a drop this month as wildfire smoke lingered over the mountains. 
But drought can't only be understood in terms of lack of rain, Younes Alila, professor in the University of British Columbia's department of forest resources management, told The Narwhal. 
He said to address drought, people have to understand the complexity of hydrology behind them. The drought this year can be connected to the atmospheric river last fall, and wildfires and the two La Niña years in a row, he explained. 
'There is no way to mitigate droughts in B.C. without a sound understanding of what controls droughts,' he said. 
While this list is by no means exhaustive, these are some of the ways the Sunshine Coast and the province could have prepared for drought this year.  
1. Action on B.C.'s Water Sustainability Act 
The province introduced the Water Sustainability Act[3] in 2016 to 'ensure a sustainable supply of fresh, clean water that meets the needs of B.C. residents today and in the future.' 
But Aaron Hill, executive director of Watershed Watch Salmon Society, said the water management tools available under the act 'have not been used much since the act came into force and they have not been used at all during this current crisis.' 
The act allows B.C. to declare a temporary significant water shortage, to issue an order to protect critical water flow and prevent 'irreversible harm to the aquatic ecosystem,' and to issue an order to prevent diversion of water from a stream if the level has become so low it threatens a population of fish. 
Chapman Creek on the Sunshine Coast, where the community declared a state of emergency due to Stage 4 drought. Photo: Shayd Johnson / The Narwhal 
Water levels have certainly reached critical levels — thousands of salmon were found dead[4] in Neekas Creek, shown in a video filmed in Heiltsuk territory. Watershed Watch also shared a video showing salmon-bearing Ford Creek[5] in Chilliwack, B.C., to be extremely low, in stark juxtaposition to a golf course with sprinklers running behind it. 
Water levels have certainly reached critical levels — thousands of salmon were found dead[4] in Neekas Creek, shown in a video filmed in Heiltsuk territory. Watershed Watch also shared a video showing salmon-bearing Ford Creek[5] in Chilliwack, B.C., to be extremely low, in stark juxtaposition to a golf course with sprinklers running behind it. 
'I don't think I'm alone in finding it very troubling that during this crippling drought, where creeks are drying up and salmon are dying for lack of water, that none of these tools have been used,' Hill said in an email to The Narwhal. 
Last year, Oliver Brandes, co-director of the University of Victoria's POLIS project on ecological governance, similarly criticized the province for not utilizing the sustainability act[6]. 
'Inadequate flows for fish are only getting worse in water-stressed parts of the province, big industrial users are permitted to extract water at virtually no cost and boil water advisories are far too frequent. Communities are feeling water insecure,' he said. 
B.C.'s NDP government announced a watershed security fund two years ago, but it has not been implemented. In the spring, the province completed public engagement, with a draft watershed security strategy expected sometime this fall. 
Hill did give the province credit for providing $57 million in funding for projects through the Healthy Watersheds Initiative and Indigenous Watersheds Initiative. 
'Many of these were led by First Nations and have contributed to climate-proofing watersheds and improving local watershed governance to counteract the fecklessness of provincial and federal water managers,' he said. 
Deborah Curran, executive director of the Environmental Law Centre, said B.C. needs to be take on holistic, 'water-centric' planning. Photo: Taylor Roades / The Narwhal 
The province also intends to create water sustainability plans under the water sustainability act, but this is also slow-going. Years in, no plans have been created — but the work has begun in collaboration with Indigenous governments, Deborah Curran, executive director at the University of Victoria's Environmental Law Centre, said in an interview. These plans are intended to empower more regional watershed governance. Curran said they will be critical in creating long-term plans with collaboration between multiple levels of government. 
Curran said more holistic and effective watershed management is needed, including 'water-centric' planning that looks 100 years ahead. Water levels are no longer a certainty, she said — and so plans have to be made for how to react, including who will be allowed to use water and who will not, so people feel prepared as a drought approaches. 
2. Say goodbye to green lawns — for real 
Speaking of water levels no longer being a certainty: introducing a ban on outdoor lawn watering in May every year is one way to prepare for unpredictable low water levels, Curran said. Some districts already have this rule in place, and the Sunshine Coast and other regions could join them. 
Outdoor water use in summer is primarily used for ornamental flowers and lawns. It's time to tweak the dominant culture and say goodbye, she said, noting it's 'low-hanging fruit' that could save up to 50 per cent of outdoor summer water use. 
And speaking of cultural change 
3. Installing water metres and charging more for water use 
Water is a human right, Curran said, but in the face of climate change, some people in society need a 'reality check,' particularly heavy users. 
She advocates for water users to pay for use, rather than a flat fee. She points out this could have tiered price ranges, keeping rates lower for families that use an average amount of water but higher for heavy users. 
On average, Canadians use 235 litres of water per day [7]according to 2015 Statistics Canada figures. 
Installing water metres would also help find leaks, which can save a lot of water. 
The Chapman Creek water treatment plant is fed by Chapman Lake, which provides water for Sunshine Coast residents. Photo: Shayd Johnson / The Narwhal 
The Sunshine Coast Regional District has 6,200 water metres and a population of almost 30,000 people. The district received approval from electors last year to borrow up to $7.25 million to undertake a water metering installation project. 
In a March 2022 report, the regional district said its water metering program is nearing completion, and it may review water rates in 2023 to help the transition to volume-based billing. 
But a challenge that the community faces is that some people are willing to pay two or three times more as long as they can continue watering their lawns and gardens, according to Remko Rosenboom, Sunshine Coast Regional District general manager, infrastructure services. 
'We have to incentivize water conservation for that for the section of our residents,' he said. 
In one part of the Sunshine Coast, metering is already in effect: water use dropped by almost 55 per cent in Gibsons after the town began tracking usage while simultaneously increasing the price of water. 
The town is now able to supply Upper Gibsons with water, which it could not do before. The aquifer has higher levels of water than it did in 2012 because while more people are being serviced, they are using less water. However, it has raised water bills for users like farmers. 
Gibsons also extended its asset management plan to include natural assets like wetlands, rather than only engineered assets like water pipe infrastructure — recognizing nature as integral infrastructure. 
4. A more efficient provincial response to water licence applications 
Former Sunshine Coast Regional District chair Lori Pratt told The Narwhal last year that the province has caused many delays in making decisions on applications, including the Church Road well site, which is supposed to add up to five million litres of water per day to the Chapman water system. 
'Water expansion projects take a lot of time as you wait for provincial approvals and testing and feasibility studies on wells and aquifers,' she said at the time[6], pointing out how an expansion application for Chapman Lake, which provides the community with water, was denied. 
A spokesperson for the Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations and Rural Development Ministry told The Narwhal last year there is ongoing consultation about the Church Road site with the Sḵwx̱wú7mesh (Squamish) Nation and the Town of Gibsons has also submitted applications for the same groundwater source. 
The Church Road well was due to come online this year, but the regional district said the project has been further delayed due to global supply chain issues. 
'Resourcing needs to be addressed because that is really impacting everything,' Rosenboom said. The ministry is 'so under resourced,' he added. 
Hough Heritage Farm, where owner Raquel Kolof, Sunshine Coast Farmers Institute president, invested more than $20,000 in a well and thousands more in electrical and pumping equipment after struggling through previous water restrictions. Photo: Shayd Johnson / The Narwhal 
Curran said water licencing in B.C. is somewhat antiquated with the idea 'whoever got here first gets it.' She said there needs to be new arrangements prepared for drought, rather than operating under the assumption water will be 'available for everyone all the time.' 
More consideration for the spiritual importance of water and public health is needed, and community and cultural values are not reflected in the licencing system, she said. 
5. Regional governments could take more proactive roles 
Patrick Connelly, co-founder of Sunday Cider in Gibsons, B.C., told The Narwhal locals often talk about how previous regional district boards failed to adequately build reservoirs and water infrastructure. 
'I think the [Sunshine Coast Regional District] is working on it and understands the level of crisis, but there's not a ton of action that has been taken that actually solves the problem,' Connelly said during the drought last year. 
There appears to be growing momentum. In addition to pursuing universal water metering, in 2021 the Sunshine Coast Regional District explored new watershed protection programs and the possibility of creating a new regional district service for watershed protection — a project that was largely funded by the Healthy Watersheds Initiative. 
The regional district also offers rebates of up to $1,000 for water users who install rainwater harvesting systems. 
The regional district published a business case for a watershed protection service in March 2022. It laid out a series of next steps including ongoing dialogue with the shshlh Nation and Sḵwx̱wú7mesh xwumixw, providing regular public updates on progress, and developing annual budget proposals based on planned water-related activities beginning with the 2023 budget. It also lists the intention to work more collaboratively with other governing authorities. 
'The thing that's missing is funding support for smaller local governments,' Rosenboom said, adding that many issues need to be weighed when making these decisions. 
'What is the financial sustainability of us wanting to move all these projects forward at the same time, because we don't think the community might be able to absorb it financially,' he asked. 
6. More government collaboration to tackle B.C.'s water problems 
Managing water means working across different jurisdictions of the province, First Nations, municipalities and private landowners. Right now, that's not exactly happening. 
Gibsons Mayor Bill Beamish told The Narwhal last year complaints about contamination are not passed onto the town from the province. 
'The ministry comes in and investigates and files a report on a public website. There's no sharing of that information with the town or the [regional district],' Beamish said. 
'When you have an investigation of a contaminated site within our watershed, which affects our drinking water, we would like to be informed.' 
Gibsons, which is working with the regional district and shishalh and Squamish nations, wants the province to support a regional watershed governance model. 
7. Protecting B.C. old-growth forests and restoring logging roads 
'Science is clear on this: we have lost our best natural protection - the forest cover — against flooding, landslides, and droughts,' Alila from the University of British Columbia said. 
Forest canopy shade keeps snow for longer, which melts slower and infiltrates the soil and replenishes groundwater reservoirs, he explained. This feeds channels during the driest parts of the year. 
Without the canopy snow melts faster and is quickly delivered 'out to the ocean.' 
Logging roads also cause runoff to be drained into ditches, which then run into streams. While this is done to prevent landslides — which logging also increases the likelihood of — it means runoff that normally saturates the soil is drained out of the watershed, Alila said. 
An ancient cedar in the Dakota Bear Sanctuary, which the Sḵwx̱wú7mesh Nation and B.C. government announced would no longer by auctioned by B.C. Timber Sales in 2021. Photo: Shayd Johnson / The Narwhal 
He also said second-growth trees, planted after logging older trees, consume as much as 50 per cent more soil than older forests. 
'The ways we have been managing the forests for a century and counting, especially more so over the last several decades, do not portray a government or an industry that appreciates the role of forests in mitigating against natural calamities such as floods, landslides and droughts,' he said. 
He advocated for single tree selection, strip cutting, and smaller patch cutting rather than clear-cutting. 
8. Not only looking at the B.C. weather forecast, but considering the context 
Alila explained that with two back-to-back La Niña years, which are wetter and cooler in the fall and winter, that means snowpack melts later and quicker — once again, not giving snowmelt a chance to infiltrate the soil. Combined with the atmospheric river, which wiped out snow at high altitudes, this meant even more melted slow was a 'lost opportunity' to recharge groundwater. 
As well, hot summers cause wildfires, which leads to dry, burnt soil that is not very good at absorbing rain and snow. 
While there are many things happening at once, he said there is 'no excuse for not being better prepared for this year's drought.' All of the conditions that he laid out were known, he argued. As well, the impact of logging on soil has been demonstrated. 
Paul Nash from Ruby's Run urban farm in Sechelt used a children's pool with water in an act of improvised storage during the 2021 drought. Photo: Shayd Johnson / The Narwhal 
'Didn't we know that we lost so much snow from mid to high elevation during the November 2021 flood event? We do - there is data that demonstrates this. Don't we know that global warming is causing more rain and less snow as time progresses? We do - this is very well-established science,' he said. 
'It is clear government agencies at all levels are not using the rather well-established science to better manage water during the driest periods of the year.' 
9. Bolder action on climate change and climate resiliency 
We know, end with the easy one, right? But for Connelly of Sunday Cider, every local response to the drought has to be grounded in pursuing climate resiliency. 
'This is climate change staring us in the face,' he told The Narwhal over the phone. He has options available to conserve water to keep his business running, but some are just 'band-aid solutions' and larger action is needed, he said. He also said things are a little easier for him than some other businesses — cider uses less water than beer or wine and apple trees are quite hardy. 
Patrick Connelly of Sunday Cider said he's taking steps to conserve water for his business, but broader action is needed to address the impacts of climate change. Photo: Shayd Johnson / The Narwhal 
The province has a target to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to 40 per cent below 2007 levels by 2030. But for years, British Columbia's emissions have been rising. In 2020, net emissions showed a dip at 63.5 million tonnes of carbon dioxide[8], which is 3 per cent lower from 2007 levels. But Jens Wieting, senior forest and climate campaigner for Sierra Club BC, suspects this is because many countries experienced temporary reductions in emissions due to the onset of COVID-19. 
Sierra Club BC, represented by Ecojustice lawyers, was in the B.C. Supreme Court on Oct. 4 suing the B.C. government for failing to report on whether its climate plans will achieve key greenhouse gas emissions targets. 
'In B.C., we have to stop acting with one hand to reduce emissions and with the other, increase emissions by allowing and subsidizing new fossil fuel development,' Wieting said, pointing to the LNG Canada terminal[9] expected to be complete in 2025 as an example. He also wants to see more investment in habitat restoration and supporting Indigenous governance. 
For Connelly, climate resiliency is connected to building a 'food sovereign' community, specifically subsidizing and supporting food farmers. He doesn't want the Sunshine Coast to rely on shipments — he points to how catastrophic flooding[10] in B.C. last year halted the delivery of basic necessities like food. 
'Climate is coming for your booze now,' he joked wryly. 
'This is climate change, this is real, we need to do something. So let's invest in solutions.' 
 [ 1]: https://thenarwhal.ca/author/stephanie-wood/ [ 2]: http://thenarwhal.ca/topics/bc-floods-solutions [ 3]: https://www2.gov.bc.ca/gov/content/environment/air-land-water/water/laws-rules/water-sustainability-act#:~:text=The%20Water%20Sustainability%20Act%20(WSA,and%20use%20of%20water%20resources. [ 4]: https://globalnews.ca/news/9182550/thousands-fish-dead-video-bc-river/ [ 5]: https://www.instagram.com/p/Cj3YGFFpy7S/ [ 6]: https://thenarwhal.ca/bc-sunshine-coast-drought/ [ 7]: https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/daily-quotidien/171101/dq171101b-eng.htm [ 8]: https://news.gov.bc.ca/releases/2022ENV0055-001345 [ 9]: https://thenarwhal.ca/bc-last-lng-project/ [ 10]: https://thenarwhal.ca/bc-climate-disasters-2021/ 
Link to the original story.
Notes



The views expressed in any and all content distributed by Newstex and its re-distributors (collectively, the "Newstex Authoritative Content") are solely those of the respective author(s) and not necessarily the views of Newstex or its re-distributors. Stories from such authors are provided "AS IS," with no warranties, and confer no rights. The material and information provided in Newstex Authoritative Content are for general information only and should not, in any respect, be relied on as professional advice. Newstex Authoritative Content is not "read and approved" before it is posted. Accordingly, neither Newstex nor its re-distributors make any claims, promises or guarantees about the accuracy, completeness, or adequacy of the information contained therein or linked to from such content, nor do they take responsibility for any aspect of such content. The Newstex Authoritative Content shall be construed as author-based content and commentary. Accordingly, no warranties or other guarantees are offered as to the quality of the opinions, commentary or anything else appearing in such Newstex Authoritative Content. Newstex and its re-distributors expressly reserve the right to delete stories at its and their sole discretion.
Load-Date: October 21, 2022



End of Document


Frustration Mounting Inside Biden Admin Over Border Policy; CNN Poll: Just Over Half Of Latino/Hispanic Voters Leaning Towards Dems, Sources: Boris Johnson Allies Say He'll Try Again To Be UK PM. Aired 9:30-10a ET
CNN CNN NEWSROOM 9:30 AM EST
October 21, 2022 Friday

Copyright 2022 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved 
Section: NEWS; Domestic
Length: 2576 words
Byline: Bianna Golodryga, Priscilla Alvarez, Bianca Nobilo, Nadia Romero
Guests: Ruben Gallego
Highlight: Race for next British PM begins after Liz Truss resigns; EPA launches federal civil rights probe over Jackson water crisis; body of a Princeton student, Misrach Ewunetie found on campus; Steve Bannon being sentenced for criminal contempt of congress
Body




[09:30:00]
BIANNA GOLODRYGA, CNN ANCHOR: Today there is growing discord between the Biden within the Biden Administration on how to handle 1000s of migrants arriving at the southern border. The Department of Homeland Security put together a plan months ago that included flying some asylum seekers to cities deeper inside the U.S. for processing. But that plan is dead for now at least.
Sources tell CNN The reason is in part because the White House grew hesitant over the complicated logistics. CNN Reporter Priscilla Alvarez has been following this. So Priscilla, this is just the latest dead end. What is going on behind the scenes here?
PRISCILLA ALVAREZ, CNN REPORTER: Well Bianna, there has been ongoing tension within the administration over how to manage the border and some plans have struggled to get White House approval and get off the ground. As you mentioned there one of those that officials pointed to was a plan to fly migrants deeper into the United States to get processed.
These are usually asylum seekers, and they would work with city officials and NGOs. Now of course, all of this is against the backdrop of the number of apprehensions along the U.S. Mexico border increasing in fiscal year 2022. There have been more than 2 million encounters. Of course that includes some repeat crossers, but it really speaks to the migration across the Western Hemisphere that the administration is grappling with.
One official described it as Hail Mary after Hail Mary as they try to sort through plans. Now, there have been some that have moved forward. Last week, for example, the administration announced a humanitarian parole program for Venezuelan migrants, and they reached an agreement with Mexico.
Mexico will now take back some Venezuelan migrants turned away under a public health authority, but others struggle to make headway and that is where there is frustration that can bubble up within the administration. The White House told me in a statement, quote, encouraging robust debate, hearing different ideas and getting lots of expertise before making policy decisions that impact millions of lives is a feature not above the Department of Homeland Security.
Also saying in a statement that they are, quote unified but they continue to struggle with the numbers along the U.S.-Mexico border as they see migration in the Western Hemisphere reach unprecedented numbers, Bianna.
[09:35:00]
GOLODRYGA: Yes, that news from President Obrador of Mexico just coming in now that he will now work on these Venezuelan migrants as well at the border. Priscilla Alvarez, thank you.
Well, as the midterms approach, one voter group has become a clear challenge for Democrats. Right now historically left leaning Latino voters are shifting toward the GOP with the potential to swing some major races. In CNN 's latest poll, just over half of Hispanic and Latino voters say they would lean toward the Democratic candidate. That number is considerably down from just four years ago.
And 21 percent of Latino voters say they support neither party. Hispanic Americans make up a fifth of registered voters in more than a dozen hotly contested House and Senate races. That includes Arizona, Colorado, Florida, Nevada, and Texas. Joining me now to discuss is Democratic Congressman Ruben Gallego of Arizona. He is up for reelection this year, and is also the Chairman of the Bold PAC, the campaign arm of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus.
Congressman, thank you so much for joining us. So let's just go over those statistics because in 2018, in the midterms, 69 percent of Hispanic voters said that they voted for Democratic House candidates. So why do you think we're seeing the shift from some Hispanic voters away from the Democratic Party?
REP. RUBEN GALLEGO (D-AZ): Well, I think you're going to see some shift. But right now, all we're seeing is that we are pretty close to hitting 2018 numbers with Hispanic voters. There is, of course, some headwind, we have a very hard economic situation for working class Latino families. But overall, you know, we have Latinos running in some very competitive seats.
And what we've seen so far, again, Latinos are ready to vote for Democrats, maybe not at the highest level that we've ever had it 2018, it was a pretty high level. But we are still pretty on track to hit the numbers that we need to hit.
GOLODRYGA: How much of a factor is the border crisis for Latino voters, specifically those that are living there in the south along border States.
GALLEGO: I mean, it can be for them, but we have to remember Latinos are very, very diverse and from all over the country. We have Latino candidates running in Nebraska, we have Latinos in the northeast, we have Latinos in Arizona, and they all have very different experiences.
So to cast everything as a border issue, I think is not the way to go. Also people you know, they have a lot of other issues going on, too, whether it's inflation, whether it's trying to find work. At the same time, you know, there's a lot of good things that we're seeing right now Latinos have the highest unemployment - highest - has the lowest unemployment rate in the history, since we started taking labor statistics.
We have the highest amount of Latino businesses that are being opened up right now. So there's a lot actually to be talking about and the border is not going to be I think the prime, I would say the prime thing that most Latinos are going to be talking about.
GOLODRYGA: Of course, this is not a monolith we're talking about, but you have taken aim at your own party even recently, in a Vox interview, I want to play it and show our viewers what you said. You said people aren't excited for Democrats, because they never know what they're going to get. We get into power and we're afraid to use that power, we get into this vicious cycle where we sometimes only win because the other people are that bad when we need to show that by us winning, this is what you get.
You get a middle class lifestyle you need to live, you get to live the American dream. So what can Democrats do to change that messaging in your view?
GALEGO: Well, exactly. Like talk with the Democrats are at their core, right? We are the party of the middle class, of the working class. And but we need to also deliver, for example, we should get back into power and deliver the child tax credit. Something that was extremely important to Latinos, 60 percent of Latino kids while there was a child tax credit, were lifted out of poverty.
We should talk about childcare, because most of our houses like my house was were led by women, and they need childcare in order for them to go to work and go to school. We need to continue talking about college. Latinos want to be rich, they want to be successful. They know that that avenue to do that is college. College now is so unaffordable, and or they have to deal with the college loan that happens with that.
That's why the President's college debt plan is extremely important among Latinos. So what's important is really to win and do something, not just win and hold the ground. And I think that's what has happened in the past, largely because of two very reluctant senators in the Senate.
GOLODRYGA: And you're up for reelection. Let's talk about what your political action committee that you chair. You spent $6 million, this cycle, the largest investment ever made. What races do you see most critical aside from your own obviously, to keep control of Congress?
GALLEGO: Well, we have Senator Cortez Masto who is running a very, very tough race right now. Nevada is always tough. She's a great, great senator. We are solely behind her. We have our Congressman Cuellar and Gonzalez down in Texas. They are also in very hard race after the gerrymandered those districts.
We have a great pickup opportunity to get Vasquez in New Mexico. We have Andrea Salinas, who is running in Oregon who ran against you know, a crypto millionaire and was outspent 14 to one and she killed it.
[09:40:00]
And we have for the first time a doctor, Yadira Caraveo who is running in Colorado. We've made even South Florida competitive. We have (inaudible) who's running down there and, you know really has been put the incumbent on notice, as well as Robert Asencio, a Police officer, a veteran who's running against Carlos Gimenez, an election denier. You know, I could keep going on and on. I'm going to miss someone. I apologize. You have Rudy Salas who's running against Valadao in the central (inaudible) of California, and kicking butt there and of course, we got to take care of our incumbents.
So we're everywhere we can be. We're spending about close to $6 million now in independent expenditures. We are teaming up with other campaigns to get out to vote, we're training also candidates how to speak to Latino community, as well as trying to fight disinformation every step of the way.
GOLODRYGA: Congressman Ruben Gallego, thank you so much for taking the time to join us today. Have a great weekend. We appreciate it.
GALLEGO: Thank you.
GOLODRYGA: And still ahead with Prime Minister Liz Truss on her way out, her opposition wants a general election but some in her party think they know a way around it. We're live this morning at Downing Street. That's up next.
[09:45:00]
GOLODRYGA: The battle to be the next British Prime Minister is heating up now that Liz Truss has resigned after just six weeks on the job and momentum could be building for Boris Johnson of all people to retake the job less than 50 days after he was forced to step down soon.
CNN's Bianca Nobilo joins me now from Downing Street in London. So Bianca, this support for Boris Johnson also apparently coming from the country's defense secretary. How soon do we expect a resolution here?
BIANCA NOBILO, CNN ANCHOR AND CORRESPONDENT: A resolution could come as early as Monday it could come before. But the Defense Secretary Ben Wallace backing while tacitly backing the former Prime Minister Boris Johnson is a big deal. He's a heavy hitter and also somebody that was tipped for leadership himself.
He's popular with the members and he's taken seriously and widely respected within the party. And if we look at the wider move, well, I have some papers to show. The Sun says Bojo: I'll be back. We also have the Daily Express. "He couldn't could he? Will Boris be back in Number 10? But for the part of the opposition parties here, they think the mere prospect of Boris Johnson returning to Number 10, Downing Street warrants a general election right now as we can see here on the cover of the Daily Mirror.
Now those who want Boris Johnson back in power will argue that he's the only one that has a mandate to continue and the legitimacy to continue as Prime Minister because he was the last Prime Minister to win the election back in 2019. They argue you can't put another leader and Prime Minister in place who hasn't won the public vote in this country and they say he could be somebody to unite the party because of that.
However, the prospect of Boris Johnson uniting the party is a difficult one to swallow because his acrimony that he had with his former chancellor, Rishi Sunak, who's likely to stand against him is becoming an ever bigger problem in Westminster today. There's a lot of factionalism between the two. So it may be that Penny Mordaunt, the current leader of the House of Commons could emerge as a unity candidate, or at least make the case for that.
But ultimately, it might be the Conservative Party members that decide and if they do, if it gets to that stage, then Boris Johnson according to all recent polls, would have the edge, Bianna.
GOLODRYGA: Boris Johnson, the uniter, words I never thought I would ever utter. But here we are, we could get a decision as soon as next week. Bianca Nobilo, thank you. And still ahead why the EPA has launched a federal investigation into the water crisis that crippled Jackson, Mississippi, this summer.
[09:50:00]
GOLODRYGA: A medical examiner is now trying to figure out how a Princeton University student died after her body was found on campus. It's a sad update to a story we first told you about yesterday. Misrach Ewunetie went missing a week ago. Officials say her body was found Thursday with no obvious signs of injury. They also say her death does not appear suspicious or criminal.
In a statement the university called this and unthinkable tragedy saying our hearts go out to her family, her friends and the many others who knew and loved her.
And the EPA has now opened a federal civil rights investigation into the water crisis in Mississippi's capital city. Residents in Jackson, a majority black city were left without reliable safe drinking water for weeks over the summer. Activist blamed systemic neglect, under investment and years of discrimination. EPA Administrator Michael Regan has described the situation as a long standing injustice. CNN's Nadia Romero joins me now. So what more are we learning Nadia?
NADIA ROMERO, CNN NATIONAL CORRESPONDENT: Oh, Bianna, this comes as welcome news to many people in the community and to community leaders who I have spoken with just this morning who say that they wonder what would happen after August and September, when there was this water crisis, the boil water advisory and all of the national media was there, the National Guard was there handing out supplies and many people said to me at that time, what will happen to us when you all leave when the national spotlight leaves, they were worried that they would be left behind.
So now hearing that the EPA has launched this investigation to see if racism, to see if racial discrimination was at the heart of why Jackson continues to have these water issues. Notably, they're asking that of the state's Department of Health and the state's Department of Environmental Quality. Those two departments are in question here.
And I want you to hear from the NAACP, the local chapter, the National chapter and nine city of Jackson residents who all filed a lawsuit last month making that same claim. This is part of a statement released just yesterday saying that "a decision by the EPA is a significant first step and holding the state accountable for its role and exacerbating the Jackson water crisis. For far too long, residents of Jackson, like black communities across the country have had water access weaponized against them."
[09:55:00]
Now along with the EPA, we're also seeing investigations done by two congressional committees being headed by a congressperson from New York and from the state of Mississippi who sent a letter to the governor of Mississippi Tate Reeves just last week. And in that letter, asking the governor why neighboring communities of Jackson, Mississippi have had their water infrastructure fixed and maintained or redone and that Jackson hasn't seen proper maintenance since the 1950s.
And beyond it, this is our capital city in the state of Mississippi. I spoke with a woman this morning who worked with the Mississippi Urban League to distribute water over the summer. She says they're still distributing water because people are still complaining about a color and odor coming out of their water.
GOLODRYGA: Nadia, you'll continue to follow this important story for us. Thank you. And still ahead. Right now Steve Bannon is awaiting his sentence for failing to cooperate with the January 6 committee. Will he get the six months in jail that prosecutors want. We're live outside that DC courthouse, up next?
Load-Date: October 21, 2022



End of Document


Pearl Harbor Elementary School Water Sample Tests Positive For Coliform Bacteria
Newstex Blogs 
Honolulu Civil Beat
October 22, 2022 Saturday 3:26 AM EST

Copyright 2022 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 638 words
Byline: Christina Jedra
Body




Oct 22, 2022( Honolulu Civil Beat: http://civilbeat.com Delivered by Newstex)  
 A water sample taken from a spigot at Pearl Harbor Elementary School this week tested positive for coliform bacteria, which could indicate the water was contaminated with soil or feces, the Navy told the school on Thursday. 
In the wake of a series of recent water main breaks[1], the Navy set up a portable water tank for the school on Sunday. In a letter to the school's principal, the Navy public works department said that a water sample taken on Wednesday tested positive for 'total coliform,' which is used as an indicator of contamination. 
'Though a positive result for coliform increases risk for gastrointestinal illness (vomiting, diarrhea, upset stomach), it generally does not cause symptomatic illness,' Navy Public Works Officer Robert Kleinman wrote. 
The problem should be isolated to Pearl Harbor Elementary, according to the education department.Courtesy: DOH/2021 
If total coliform is high, it is possible that harmful viruses, bacteria, and parasites could be found in the water, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says on its website.[2] 
There have been no reports of illness at this time, according to the Hawaii Department of Education. But the Navy advised Principal Shannon Tamashiro to encourage anyone with gastrointestinal symptoms to seek medical attention. 
Water samples taken from the tap on Sunday tested negative for coliform and E. coli, according to Navy spokesman Charles Anthony. The sample taken from the tap on Wednesday tested negative for E. coli but positive for coliform, he said. Samples taken from the same tap on Thursday were received on Friday and came back negative for coliform. 
In a statement, Anthony said there are multiple reasons why a sample taken from 'a spigot exposed to the elements' would test positive. 
'Water in the buffalo (tank), which is used primarily to wash hands, was certified clean before it left Schofield Barracks,' he said. 'No other water buffalo tested positive. A new, sanitized water buffalo was also provided to the school for hand washing.' 
He noted the water tank was separate from the Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam water system. 
Derek Inoshita, a DOE spokesman, said it's unlikely anyone drank the contaminated water. Since the Navy contaminated its drinking water system with fuel last year, the school has been using bottled water for drinking, 'minimizing the exposure risk to the bacteria,' he said in a statement. 
There is no risk to other schools at this time, according to Inoshita. 
'The source was the portable tank, so no other schools are affected,' he said. 'It should be clarified that the portable water tank is a self-contained, self-service unit that is not connected to or pumped into the school's water line.' 
On Friday afternoon, Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam rescinded the boil water advisory that's been in place since last Friday. Multiple tests showed no bacteria present in the system, the base said in a press release. 
'As the system returns to full functionality, residents may initially see sediment in their water,' the press release said. It added that the CDC recommends that users flush water lines for five minutes and replace any ice after the advisory was lifted. 
The military's distribution of bottled water will stop at 6 p.m. Friday, the press release said. 
 Sign up for our FREE morning newsletter and face each day more informed.  

 Sorry. That's an invalid e-mail.  

 Thanks! We'll send you a confirmation e-mail shortly. 
 [ 1]: https://www.civilbeat.org/2022/10/families-demand-answers-after-navy-water-main-breaks-near-pearl-harbor/ [ 2]: https://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/drinking/private/wells/testing.html#:~:text=Fecal%20coliforms%20and%20E.,diarrhea%2C%20dysentery%2C%20and%20hepatitis. 
Link to the original story.
Notes



The views expressed in any and all content distributed by Newstex and its re-distributors (collectively, the "Newstex Authoritative Content") are solely those of the respective author(s) and not necessarily the views of Newstex or its re-distributors. Stories from such authors are provided "AS IS," with no warranties, and confer no rights. The material and information provided in Newstex Authoritative Content are for general information only and should not, in any respect, be relied on as professional advice. Newstex Authoritative Content is not "read and approved" before it is posted. Accordingly, neither Newstex nor its re-distributors make any claims, promises or guarantees about the accuracy, completeness, or adequacy of the information contained therein or linked to from such content, nor do they take responsibility for any aspect of such content. The Newstex Authoritative Content shall be construed as author-based content and commentary. Accordingly, no warranties or other guarantees are offered as to the quality of the opinions, commentary or anything else appearing in such Newstex Authoritative Content. Newstex and its re-distributors expressly reserve the right to delete stories at its and their sole discretion.
Load-Date: October 22, 2022



End of Document


Education Secretary: Debt Relief Program Can Move "Full Speed Ahead" Despite Temporary Hold; Borrowers Left In Limbo After Court Pauses Debt Relief Program; 15M Without Power In Ukraine Amid Fresh Wave Of Russian Attacks; Inside Secret Drone Workshop Where Ukrainians Make Weapons; Wave Of RSV Spreads, Overwhelming Children's Hospitals; Homicide Now A Leading Cause Of Death In Pregnant Women In The U.S. Aired 7-8a ET
CNN New Day Sunday 7:00 AM EST
October 23, 2022 Sunday

Copyright 2022 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved 
Section: NEWS
Length: 6638 words
Byline: Amara Walker, Boris Sanchez, Coy Wire, Jasmine Wright, Camila Bernal, Dan Merica, Frederik Pleitgen, Jacqueline Howard, Gloria Borger, Allison Chinchar
Guests: Thomas Murray
Highlight: The head of the Education Department pledged Saturday to keep "moving full speed ahead" on plans to implement President Joe Biden's student debt relief program, coming a day after a federal appeals court put a temporary hold on it, barring the administration from canceling loans covered under the policy while it's under review. 22 million Americans who already applied for student debt relief are in limbo after an appeals court temporarily froze President Biden's signature program. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit granted a stay preventing the government from moving forward with the debt cancelation it had said could start as early as next week. More than 1.5 million people remain without power and heat this morning as Russia missile attacks continue to target electrical facilities and other critical civilian infrastructure. Officials are now scrambling to restore the power supply before freezing cold temperatures set in. CNN gets access to a secret Ukrainian military drone workshop that could be leveling the playing field in the war with Russia. Children's hospitals across the country are being overwhelmed with an increase in new cases of a common virus. The latest data from the CDC says there were more than 7,300 cases of RSV detected last week. Women in the U.S. who are pregnant or who have recently given birth are more likely to be murdered than to die from obstetric causes -- and these homicides are linked to a deadly mix of intimate partner violence and firearms, according to researchers from Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health.
Body




[07:00:00]
COY WIRE, CNN SPORTS ANCHOR: Syracuse was up 21-10 at halftime but here comes Will Shipley and the Tigers. 50 yards for the go-ahead touchdown in the fourth quarter. Orange had a chance late. But Garrett Shrader's pass is picked off by R.J. Mickens.
Clemson holds on 27-21. But look Syracuse still 6 and 1. They're still going to be ranked in the top 25. I hate to do this to you, Boris, but --
BORIS SANCHEZ, CNN ANCHOR: Thank you, Coy.
WIRE: -- but you're looking good. Lot to be proud of. Keep your head up. Dino paper (ph) and the boys are looking good.
SANCHEZ: I've been asking for Syracuse Orange highlights --
AMARA WALKER, CNN ANCHOR: You have been.
SANCHEZ: -- for weeks.
WALKER: That was customized for you, I think.
SANCHEZ: And this, Coy, of course brings up the loss. Listen, they are who we thought they were and we let them off the hook, Coy.
WIRE: You almost had them. Keep that head up, big man.
WALKER: Coy, thank you so much.
SANCHEZ: Appreciate it.
WIRE: Thanks.
WALKER: The next hour of New Day starts now.
And good morning, everyone. Welcome to your New Day. I'm Amara Walker.
SANCHEZ: Good morning, Amara. I'm Boris Sanchez.
Doubling down. The Biden administration says they will fight in court to keep that student debt relief program alive. What does that mean for thousands of applicants? And how long could that legal fight last?
WALKER: We'll also have the latest on the brutal attacks in Ukraine as Russia continues to hammer the country's infrastructure. We'll take you inside a secret workshop where Ukrainian soldiers are building weapons against Russia.
SANCHEZ: And residents in Jackson, Mississippi are still facing problems with the city's water. Now the EPA is opening up a federal civil rights investigation. We're going to tell you exactly what and who is getting investigated.
WALKER: Also possible thunderstorms, critical fire conditions and heavy rain. More than 10 million people facing severe weather threats across the country. Your forecast coming up.
SANCHEZ: Here we are bright and awake, Sunday, October 23. Grateful that you're starting your week with us. Great to be with you as well, Amara.
WALKER: It was a slow wake up but we're here. We're ready, right? Boris, always good to be with you -- be -- good to be with you.
And we begin with a fight over President Biden's student debt relief program. The White House is encouraging people who are eligible to keep applying online despite a federal appeals court putting a temporary hold on the program.
SANCHEZ: Yes, remember, several Republican led states are suing to stop the government from canceling these loans. According to the Department of Education, more than 22 million Americans have applied for debt relief since the department began accepting the applications last week.
Let's go to CNN's Jasmine Wright. Jasmine, this program was scheduled to start today and now it's facing this uncertain future.
JASMIN WRIGHT, CNN WHITE HOUSE REPORTER: That's right, Boris. Well, this Sunday as when the White House identified that some borrowers could start to see their debt canceled. Obviously, that's not going to be the case. Now, the Court of Appeals has given the White House until Monday which is tomorrow to respond to that hold. And then those states that brought the challenge have until Tuesday to respond to the White House, obviously, pushing this timeline for when folks could start to see relief closer and closer to the upcoming midterms if it is allowed to proceed at all.
Now, of course, the White House, you're right, is telling people to continue to apply online, put in those applications as they are doubling down, wanting to go full steam ahead when it comes to trying to get some relief to the American people when it comes to student loans. And they're going on the offensive. Yesterday, the Education Secretary Miguel Cardona released an op ed in which he really likened Republicans who are opposing the student debt plan to Hippocrates. I want to read you some of it. He said, "These same Republican attorneys general and officials, however, didn't file lawsuits when $58.5 billion and pandemic relief loans were forgiven for their state's business owners. They didn't oppose $2 trillion dollars in tax cuts to the highest earning businesses and individuals as part of the Trump tax giveaway.
And they didn't complain when Republican members of Congress got millions of dollars for their paycheck Protection Program loans forgiven by the federal government last year. It's only when relief is going to working and middle-class Americans that these elected officials have a problem."
So again, here Boris and Amara, no signs of backing down from the White House as they hope that this student debt cancelation that the President did by executive order helps galvanize their base specifically when it comes to young voters and young voters of color just ahead of the midterm elections. Boris, Amara?
SANCHEZ: It is a big part of their midterm message. Jasmine Wright from Washington, D.C., thank you so much.
I should actually correct myself because earlier I said it was thousand, it's actually millions of people that have applied to have their loans forgiven, but now that sense of relief has been replaced by worry.
WALKER: Yes. CNN's Camila Bernal has more on that.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
[07:05:10]
CAMILA BERNAL, CNN NATIONAL CORRESPONDENT (voice-over): It may take a little longer, but Cody Hounanian is still expecting a third of his student loan to be forgiven.
CODY HOUNANIAN, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, STUDENT DEBT CRISIS CENTER: It's a light at the end of the tunnel.
BERNAL (voice-over): He's referring to President Joe Biden's student loan forgiveness program that would cover $10,000 of the student debt. Because while he's been out of college for nine years, he still owes $30,000.
HOUNANIAN: I recently married. Me and my wife are going to be thinking about purchasing a home. So it's all of a sudden kind of right in front of me again, because I'm thinking about the kind of debt I have and I need to finance my future and get a home.
BERNAL (voice-over): But well, the administration was expected to start granting loan discharges as early as Sunday, a federal appeals court put a temporary administrative hold on the program, a move being argued in and out of the courtroom. USC Economics Professor Robert Dekle says, that while all his students support the program, he asked them to consider different perspectives.
ROBERT DEKLE, PROFESSOR OF ECONOMICS, UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA: Relative to defense spending and the overall government budget, the annual cost is not huge, but there is -- it's going to be a burden on current taxpayers.
BERNAL (voice-over): He also says if the goal is to help low-income families, the government should instead invest in say early childhood education. As an economist, Dekle says he thinks short term loan forgiveness will only make inflation worse. But as a professor, he believes long term, this will make the U.S. more competitive.
DEKLE: We need people with skills. And the way to get it is in higher education.
BERNAL (voice-over): And it's that education that Hounanian says got him to where he is today. Now the executive director of the Student Debt Crisis Center, a nonprofit focused on ending the student debt crisis.
HOUNANIAN: For me, the only way to open the door was to take on student loan debt, even though it's created really unnecessary challenges and, you know, we've had to stressed and all that but my future is brighter nonetheless.
BERNAL (voice-over): Now, he's not only waiting for his loan forgiveness, but also fighting so that others can also get the relief.
HOUNANIAN: My dream my vision for a better America in the future is one where my kids don't even have to consider student loan debt.
BERNAL (voice-over): Camila Bernal, CNN, Los Angeles.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WALKER: In the closing weeks of this year's midterm elections, among the most closely watched races is Pennsylvania's Senate contest.
WALKER: It is a big one. And Republican Mehmet Oz has narrowed Democrat John Fetterman's lead in a tight race that could determine which party controls the Senate. CNN's Dan Merica was at an event for Fetterman and joins us now.
DAN MERICA, CNN NATIONAL POLITICAL REPORTER: That's right, Amara and Boris. John Fetterman held event here in key Chester County on Saturday night. He spoke at length on stage with Senator Amy Klobuchar. It is a unique event for Fetterman, who, as you noted, had a stroke in May, return to the campaign trail in June, has mostly headlined rallies where he had a stump speech, you know, litany of things he wanted to hit.
This was a different kind of event. He was up there, he did not have necessarily notes, did not have issues he wanted to hit and was kind of led in the conversation by Klobuchar. Fetterman did acknowledge he used closed captioning technology which allowed him to read what Klobuchar was saying as she spoke. And why does that matter? Everything right now in Pennsylvania is pointing to the debate on Tuesday between Oz and Fetterman.
That debate is going to be key because of the Oz's attacks on Fetterman's health and closed caption technology will be used at that debate. That's why, in many ways, this event was almost a dry run for the debate. Now Fetterman and Klobuchar spoken a number of issues including abortion, the economy, their personal background. But one of the finest moments came on crime when Fetterman really unleashed on how the Oz campaigns has hit him repeatedly on crime. Take a listen to what he said.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
JOHN FETTERMAN (D), PENNSYLVANIA SENATE CANDIDATE: He literally doesn't have a plan. Yes, other than to talk, and that's been a hallmark of his campaign. Just not any plans, just she photo ops, or just empty kinds of arguments.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
MERICA: Now, guys, it's not happenstance that we're here in Chester County, a collar county around Philadelphia. This was a critical county to delivering the White House to Joe Biden in 2020. It helped deliver Democrats the House in 2018. But as recently as 2012, this county voted for a Republican presidential nominee and Mitt Romney.
That is why Fetterman is here. He and his aides know this is going to be a critical county if they're going to defeat Oz in November. And this is all -- hanging over all of this is the fact that polls have tightened of late. They've closed since over the summer when Fetterman had a double-digit lead. They're now neck and neck here in Pennsylvania between Oz and Fetterman and that just rachets up the tension as we head into the debate on Tuesday.
[07:10:04]
SANCHEZ: Dan Merica, thanks for that report.
Looking overseas now, Ukraine says that Russia is pulling troops out of Kherson and ordering residents there to evacuate and to move deeper into Russian held territory. This is happening as Ukrainian fighters have advanced that counter offensive in the region to recapture that city. Across Ukraine, though, Russia missile attacks continue to target electrical facilities and other critical civilian infrastructure.
WALKER: More than 1.5 million people remain without power and heat this morning. And as winter quickly approaches, officials are now scrambling to restore the power supply before freezing cold temperatures set in, although, it is getting quite cold overnight, nearing freezing.
CNN Senior International Correspondent Fred Pleitgen is on the scene live in Dnipro, Ukraine. Fred, talk us through what the latest is and how the people there are dealing with, you know, these scheduled blackouts. FREDERIK PLEITGEN, CNN SENIOR INTERNATIONAL CORRESPONDENT: Yes, you know what, they're doing their best to deal with it. The schedule blackouts, especially happening now in Kyiv also, in the capital of Ukraine, but in many other places also, just because there is so little electricity available because of the strikes that have been going on.
And Amara, there's also other civilian areas that have been struck overnight specifically in the town of Mykolaiv. The Russians there striking two buildings with missiles. Apparently a five-storey building was completely destroyed. Five people were injured in that. And then another larger 10-storey building was hit as well.
One of the things about that strike because it's something that we've been seeing, especially in those southern cities like Mykolaiv very recently, very often is that the Russians use S-300 missiles for that. Those are normally missiles that are used to shoot down planes but the Russians apparently now using them in a surface-to-surface capability which makes these missiles extremely inaccurate. Of course, if you shoot them at civilian areas, civilian casualties are something that is very, very likely.
At the same time on the battlefield, the Ukrainian say they are holding their own, they're making gains in the south. But they're also now managing to hold off the Russians in the East. And we went with one unit who showed us how they use tech to do exactly that. Here's what we learned.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
PLEITGEN (voice-over): As the crow flies, the front line is only a few 100 yards away in Bakhmut. Ukraine's forces are both outmanned and outgunned here but holding on because they say they're outwitting the Russians.
We've been given access to this secret workshop where tech savviness is leveling the battlefield, the commander tells me.
STARSHINA, 93RD BRIGADE, UKRAINIAN ARMY: Oh, it's fun, it's game changing stuff because we have no so much forces, we have no so much guns and bullets and so on, so we have to be smart, or no die zone.
PLEITGEN (voice-over): The place is run like a startup, no idea is off limits. The soldiers work around the clock, repairing, modifying and arming consumer drones led by a young whiz known as the serpent.
THE SERPENT, 93RD BRIGADE, UKRAINIAN ARMY (through translation): It's way better to know in advance that an assault is coming literally every meter. We are watching every centimeter here. It helps us to save lives during both the assault and the withdrawal.
PLEITGEN (voice-over): Ukraine's army says the Russians have around five times more troops here than Kyiv does. The brigade filmed this video they say shows Russian simply charging towards Ukrainian positions out in the open, disregarding the lives of Moscow's own soldiers. THE SERPENT (through translation): There are a lot of them and they have a lot of weapons. We have creativity.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: In our platoon, I do bonds and --
PLEITGEN (voice-over): And they have their weapons expert, a 19-year- old who goes by the call sign Varnak (ph) and turns grenades into aerial bombs in his makeshift bomb factory.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: We reroll them as a science for drone dropping.
PLEITGEN (voice-over): He removes any excess weight and attaches a pressure fuse.
(on-camera): It's finished.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: No, we need a tail. And some tape. And you tape this on a drone. Tape this and just drop it.
PLEITGEN (voice-over): It's not just drones. The unit also built this radio-controlled gun turret and a kamikaze cart packed with explosive. All of this is developed on the battlefield for the battlefield helping Ukraine's army turn the tide here.
STARSHINA: We defend our positions. And now we contra -- we make contra offense and we are also successful in it.
PLEITGEN (voice-over): Like so many of the troops defending Bakhmut, the tech warriors often work to exhaustion, thinking up new ways to blunt Russia's massive assault despite a lack of heavy weapons.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
[07:15:03]
PLEITGEN: Still pretty tough going there. By the way, that battlefield that we were on is right now said to be probably the most dangerous place in all of Ukraine, also because the Russians have some of their most capable and most brutal fighters there among them from the Wagner private military company which is known around the world for its brutal tactics that its uses. At the same time, the Ukrainian say they are now able to somewhat turn the tide, however, big problem the Ukrainians have right now as far as the whole country is concerned, remain those long-distance strikes by the Russians.
We've got some information a couple of minutes ago, the Ukrainians now saying overnight, they shot down 16 kamikaze drones, guys.
WALKER: Wow. It is incredible to see the tenacity of the Ukrainian troops and the resilience of the people. Thank you so much, Fred Pleitgen, for your reporting.
SANCHEZ: Still ahead this morning, across the country, doctors seeing a surge of RSV infections in kids. The spike, leaving some hospitals running short of pediatric beds.
WALKER: And a suspect in custody after two people are killed in a Dallas hospital. We'll tell you what we know about the investigation.
Plus, from high water bills to frustration with city officials, many residents in Jackson, Mississippi still facing issues when it comes to the city's water system. And now the EPA is launching an investigation.
[07:20:25]
SANCHEZ: Children's hospitals across the country are being overwhelmed with an increase in new cases of a common virus. The latest data from the CDC says there were more than 7,300 cases of RSV detected last week. That's more than any other week in the past two years. RSV is spreading at unusually high levels, causing kids to fill beds more now than they had over the last two years of the COVID-19 pandemic in hospitals.
Joining us now to discuss is Dr. Thomas Murray, he's the Associate Medical Director for Infection Prevention for Yale New Haven Children's Hospital. Doctor, we're grateful to have your expertise this Sunday morning. If you could please explain for those of us who are not familiar what RSV is, how it affects kids, and what parents should be looking out for.
DR. THOMAS MURRAY, ASSOC. MEDICAL DIRECTOR, INFECTION PREVENTION, YALE NEW HAVEN CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL: Great. RSV is a respiratory virus like many of the other respiratory viruses out there that can cause many symptoms ranging from the common cold, to more serious symptoms such as trouble breathing, that forces the kids to come into the hospital. We have seen an uptick in the last couple of weeks all over the country, including here at Yale.
One thing parents can do is kind of return to some of the infection control things that we were used to doing before COVID. Things like washing your hands, cleaning surfaces that are frequently touched, like doorknobs and shared toys, things like that, that can help keep kids safe.
SANCHEZ: And, Doctor, how is it that parents can tell the difference between say, RSV and just a common cold?
MURRAY: It's very difficult because all of the different respiratory viruses, including COVID-19 can kind of look the same even to doctors. So the only really way to tell is to do a test. Fortunately, the treatment isn't any different for most of them. So it's really just supportive care, controlling fever with Tylenol or ibuprofen, and then really watching the breathing to make sure that the child isn't having any difficulty.
SANCHEZ: Do you think this surge has anything to do with the fact that most of us were at home for the last couple of years and a lot of kids didn't have classrooms to go to and they didn't have a chance to have their immune systems exposed to this kind of thing?
MURRAY: Yes, I think you're absolutely correct. What's happened is that over the last couple of years, because children have been masked and distanced, they haven't been exposed to RSV. In a typical year, almost every child is exposed to RSV. But now we have two or three generations of kids upwards of three years of age that have had no exposure. So unfortunately, they're all getting sick at the same time. And that's part of the reason we've been so busy in pediatrics.
SANCHEZ: I'm assuming this is kind of an indicator of what we might expect from the flu or COVID-19 as the weather gets colder, and people spend more time huddled together indoors?
MURRAY: That is correct. We have been some -- anticipating that for some time. This respiratory surge, whether it's flu or RSV, once the kids put on masks, we suspected that when the masks came off, this might happen. So a lot of energy has been put into preparing for this. And I think flu is, frankly, the big unknown at this point.
In the southern hemisphere, they had a lot of flu activity, which often predicts flu activity in the northern hemisphere. So I really encourage everyone to get their flu shot. We may have been a little bit lacks about getting our flu shot the last couple of years because there hasn't been a lot of flu around, but this is not the year not to get the flu shot.
SANCHEZ: Have you started seeing an increase in cases of COVID-19?
MURRAY: COVID-19, we have not seen a lot of children hospitalized for that. It's fairly sporadic. It's one to two per week. We've also had a few cases of influenza, again, one to two per week. But right now, it really is the RSV as well as there's a strain of rhinovirus out there which tend to make kids quite sick.
SANCHEZ: And Doctor, we'd gotten indications that some hospitals were being forced to treat young patients in hallways and in play rooms. I'm assuming you haven't seen anything like that.
MURRAY: We haven't gotten there yet. But we have been very aggressive about planning for this, literally, for the last two years. We knew this coming. We didn't know when it was going to come, whether it was last year or this year or next year. But we're able to do things like bring in doctors to cover extra shifts, to kind of help see more people in the emergency room.
[07:25:05]
Some doctors and nurses help get kids out of the hospital very fast, whereas, you know, sometimes you wait for discharge for a while, but we're able to really get kids out to clear that bed for the next child. So we're working very, very hard as I'm sure most children's hospitals are to really get kids into the safest place so they can receive care.
SANCHEZ: Yes, really important for parents to be aware of this right now. Dr. Thomas Murray, we appreciate you sharing some advice.
MURRAY: Thank you.
SANCHEZ: Of course.
WALKER: And doctors across the U.S. are tracking a dangerous trend. The homicide rate among pregnant women is on the rise. Now many doctors are being urged to screen patients for domestic violence. CNN's Jacqueline Howard has more.
JACQUELINE HOWARD, CNN HEALTH REPORTER: Amara and Boris, this is a serious and tragic problem. Rates of homicide among pregnant or postpartum women do appear to be rising in this country. One study found there were about five pregnancy associated homicides per 100,000 live births in the year 2020. That rate is a notable increase from around three per 100,000 in the two preceding years.
And overall, this study found the risk of homicide was 35 percent greater for women who are pregnant or postpartum than for those who are not pregnant. And that's why two Harvard researchers are now urging doctors to screen pregnant patients for signs of intimate partner violence.
Writing in an editorial this week, they say, quote, "Pregnancy typically increases women's interactions with healthcare providers, presenting opportunities for screening or other approaches to help women experiencing, or at risk of violence." So they hope that screening in the doctor's office can help reduce a woman's risk before it's too late. Amara and Boris, back to you.
WALKER: Yes, it's very concerning. Jacqueline, thank you.
Still ahead, why the EPA has launched a federal investigation into the water crisis that cripple Jackson, Mississippi this summer.
[07:30:00]
WALKER: Here are some of the top stories we're following. Two hospital employees are dead after a shooting at a Methodist Dallas Medical Center in Texas.
SANCHEZ: Yes, police say the shooting happened inside the hospital late Saturday morning. An officer shot the suspect, 30-year-old Nestor Hernandez, injuring him. He was then taken into custody and transported to another hospital for treatment. The Dallas police say Hernandez is currently on parole for aggravated robbery and had an ankle monitor on at the time of the shooting. So, far police have not determined a motive in that case.
In Arizona, some armed individuals dressed in tactical gear were spotted at a ballot drop box. They apparently left the area after police responded. The Maricopa County board of supervisors released a statement on this incident saying, "Uninformed vigilantes outside Maricopa County's drop boxes are not increasing election integrity. We will do everything possible in our roles to protect voters, election workers, and our free and fair elections."
The Republican National Committee is now suing Google, claiming the search giant is sending its campaign e-mails into spam folders. The party says google is discriminating against them because of political bias. CNN reported in August that federal election regulators voted to allow a plan from Google that would allow campaign e-mails to bypass the company's spam filters.
WALKER: The Environmental Protection Agency has now opened a federal civil rights investigation into the State of Mississippi over the Jackson water crisis. The EPA is investigating whether the Mississippi Department of Health and the state's Department of Environmental Quality discriminated against the majority black population.
Now, the situation got so bad that the national guard was deployed to hand out bottled water for months and those lines were hours long. Many residents of Jackson city -- of the city of Jackson, which is third -- 83 percent black, they are still wary of using water from their faucets even though the 40-day boil water notice was lifted last month and the repairs made. The NAACP says, it is an important first step in holding the state accountable.
Abre' Conner is NAACP's environmental and climate justice director. We really appreciate you joining us this morning. And Abre', the EPA is investigating in response to the NAACP's complaint, we know that. And your organization says that the Jackson residents, like many black communities across the country, I think you said this, have had water access, "Weaponized," against them. How so?
ABRE' CONNER, NAACP DIRECTOR OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE JUSTICE: Well, what we know is that at least for the last century, that black communities, when they try to build, when they tried to ensure they have everything that they need in order to be sustainable, that because of systemic racism it makes it really hard.
So, for example, in Jackson, out of the last 25 years, there's only been three years that the city has been able to get federal funding for water infrastructure issues. And this is because even though we have the Biden's promise, for example, for justice 40 to prioritize historically disadvantaged communities, oftentimes that funding goes through the state.
And so, if the state, for example, decides, well, we don't want to ensure that a place like Jackson is prioritized. Well then, it can do everything in its power to ensure that that's not the case. We've seen this in other black communities.
[07:35:00]
When it came time for them to be prioritized, when it came time for an emergency declaration, for example, to be declared, there's oftentimes a slow response. And this is exactly what we've seen in Jackson. This is exactly what we've seen by Governor Reeves. That at every step of the way, he's made it nearly impossible for Jackson to be able to rebuild
WALKER: So, then are you saying that the State is to blame? Because, you know, I was on the ground when this was happening in real time. And, you know, we heard from so many people, including the mayor, and officials saying that this water crisis, obviously, goes back decades. But all comes down to money, right?
And of course, The city of Jackson, we know, that the taxpayer-base had decreased a lot over the years with so many people moving out into the suburbs. But also, when it came to the State, I think it was in 2021 there was a winter freeze that literally shut down the entire water system and the city went to the State and said look, we need $47 million and they just got a fraction of that. So, are you placing the responsibility squarely on the State's shoulders?
CONNER: This is -- a lot of it has to do with the State. A lot of it has to do with Governor Reeves. Governor Reeves -- even prior to him being the governor, when he was lieutenant governor, when he was in the treasurer position, he used those positions to make it hard for Jackson to be able to rebuild. What we also have to look at is how do we creatively think outside of the box around federal spending.
Again, like I said, a lot of times it comes to the state, and it doesn't necessarily flow straight to the communities that need it most. And so, it's definitely the State's responsibility because they are given a lot of power to allow for communities to rebuild. It also, as we identified in our testimony to Congress a few weeks ago, it's often an opportunity for us to think outside of the box about how we ensure that federal funding goes straight to communities.
WALKER: So, what do you hope will come out of the EPA investigation in terms of, you know, holding people or the State responsible? The EPA does have the power to withhold federal funds, but we don't want that to happen, right, because that could only just exacerbate the water crisis.
CONNER: Well, this is really an opportunity for the governor. It's an opportunity for the State to understand that he can't go around making comments like it's always -- it's -- every day is a great day to not be in Jackson or to be slow to respond to a water crisis. I mean, individuals in Jackson have known for years that their water has not been safe. That's why they've been using bottled water for a long period of time.
But this is an opportunity for the State to actually come together with the community, to come together with the EPA, and actually come up with a solution with the community at the very center. This is -- we're saying enough is enough. You know, you cannot systemically discriminate against black communities and think that you're not going to have to face some repercussions because of it. And so, we're hoping that community is really centered in the responses and for us to be able to come up with some real solutions.
WALKER: We're talking about clean water, a basic human right. Abre' Conner, appreciate you. Thank you very much.
And the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality said in a statement to CNN that its hands were tied legally to responding to the allegations at this time. Adding, "We will cooperate with the process while continuing our efforts to protect the environment and the health and safety of the entire population of the State of Mississippi." Back after this.
[07:40:00]
SANCHEZ: Rerouting resources. A super PAC aligned with Republican Senate Minority Leader, Mitch McConnell, has decided to yank millions of dollars in ads that it intended to spend on New Hampshire's Senate race.
WALKER: The decision effectively means the party has given up on its candidate, Dan Bolduc, who's running against Maggie Hassan. But it comes at a time when Republicans in the States had united against Bolduc. CNN's Gloria Borger with more.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
GLORIA BORGER, CNN CHIEF POLITICAL ANALYST (voiceover): New Hampshire, home to the first presidential primaries and now --
DON BOLDUC, (R) NEW HAMPSHIRE SENATE CANDIDATE: Get me in the senate. All right.
BORGER (voiceover): -- home to a crucial senate race. Attracting voters with fiercely held views.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: I mean, who doesn't want to make America great?
BORGER (voiceover): That's the goal, of course. But watching Republicans trying to unify this election season is like watching a bunch of arranged marriages. In New Hampshire between a conventional and successful incumbent governor with a Senate candidate calling for a new breed of party outsiders.
BORGER (on camera): So, what would you call yourselves?
BOLDUC: We're patriots, right? We're a new ilk of the Republican Party.
BORGER (voiceover): That's retired brigadier general Don Bolduc who served 10 tours in Afghanistan and narrowly won a PAC primary as a border protecting and election denying conservative. Once opposed by the Republican establishment.
BOLDUC: The establishment has become the problem. And people want a solution to that.
BORGER (voiceover): So, what exactly is the Republican problem?
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: They're not audacious enough. They're not aggressive enough.
[07:45:00]
BILL BORDEAUX, NEW HAMPSHIRE VOTER: Trump was like a hand grenade thrown into the Republican Party. Love him or hate him, he definitely changed things up. BORGER (voiceover): Bolduc was not endorsed by Trump. He's an underdog in this race against former governor and one-term Senator Democrat Maggie Hassan. She's talking a lot about abortion politics. He's talking a lot about the economy and immigration.
BOLDUC: Will you vote and support the southern border? Yes, baby.
BORGER (voiceover): And he's getting a lot of money from a Political Action Committee aligned with Senate Republican Leader, Mitch McConnell, the ultimate insider and not a Bolduc favorite.
BORGER (on camera): His PAC has given you $23 million.
BOLDUC: Well, then thank you very much.
BORGER (voiceover): And yet, the self-proclaimed change candidate seems unchanged.
BOLDUC: I want leadership to change in the United States.
BORGER (on camera): Leadership but --
BOLDUC: I want it to change.
BORGER (voiceover): Bolduc is among a large chorus of Republican right-wing warriors, who now find themselves welcoming both money and new found support from the very party Pubaz (ph) they once dismissed.
BOLDUC: He's a Chinese communist sympathizer.
BORGER (voiceover): That was about the popular Governor Chris Sununu, seeking his fourth term who had no kinder words for Bolduc.
GOV. CHRIS SUNUNU (R-NH): Kind of a conspiracy theorist-type candidate.
BORGER (voiceover): But post-primary, an embrace and a nod from the governor.
SUNUNU: He's an amazing individual with this background, this war hero background, that just wants to stand up and serve.
BORGER (voiceover): And now, needs to reach out beyond his conservative base.
BRAD TOOD, REPUBLICAN STRATEGIST: New Hampshire is an ordinary State. There are more independents than members of either party in New Hampshire. A so go -- as the independents go, so goes New Hampshire.
BORGER (voiceover): And so, a Bolduc switch on the legitimacy of the 2020 election. From this --
BOLDUC: So, I signed a letter with 120 other generals and admirals saying that Trump won the election, and damn it, I stand by word.
BORGER (voiceover): -- to this. BORGER (on camera): So, you believe the election was not stolen?
BOLDUC: Not stolen but irregularities and fraud.
BORGER (voiceover): The State Republican Party chairman says it's all for the greater good.
STEPHEN STEPANEK, CHAIRMAN, NEW HAMPSHIRE REPUBLICAN PARTY: If we are going to change the direction of this country, you have to support our entire Republican ticket. Because if you don't, the Democrats win and the direction of the country doesn't change.
BORGER (voiceover): Unity at all costs, not only in New Hampshire, consider Virginia governor Glenn Youngkin's support for election denier Kari Lake.
GOV. GLENN YOUNGKIN (R-VA): The Republican Party has to be a party where we are not shunning people. What Arizona deserves is a Republican governor.
BORGER (voiceover): Bolduc supporter, Paul Grant, hopes the harmony lasts.
PAUL GRANT, DON BOLDUC SUPPORTER: I think Republicans, sometimes, are amateur when it comes to politics. And by that, I mean, I don't agree with a lot of the policies or stances of the Democratic Party, but they play to win. They do. They stick together.
BORGER (voiceover): There's just one small problem on the horizon.
TODD: It would be one thing to say that Republican Party is not just a big tent, it's a big tent with a bar fight.
BORGER (voiceover): And it's not about to reach last call any time soon.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WALKER: Fascinating report there by our Gloria Borger. Thank you for that.
And a quick programming note for you, you can catch an all new episode of "Stanley Tucci: Searching for Italy" tonight. Here's a preview.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
STANLEY TUCCI, "STANLEY TUCCI: SEARCHING FOR ITALY" HOST: As you're driving through Puglia, you see these buildings that are ubiquitous, called truly under these conical shaped buildings with little finial on top. They're built that way because in the 14th century there were high property taxes. When the tax man come around, they would basically deconstruct the top of the house and then you weren't taxed on your house if it hadn't been completed. Then the tax man would leave and then they would rebuild the house again. They don't take them apart anymore. That's it. That's the story. They're so cool though. No place else in the world, really, has them.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WALKER: "Stanley Tucci: Searching for Italy" airs tonight at 9:00 right here on CNN.
SANCHEZ: There is a major storm system bringing severe weather across the United States today. We're tracking heavy rain to even snow in some parts. Your forecast is up after a quick break.
[07:50:00]
WALKER: Today, over 10 million people could see severe weather. And for some, that means possible thunderstorms, heavy rain, and snow.
SANCHEZ: Let's take you to the CNN weather center now and Meteorologist Allison Chinchar. Allison, what are you seeing?
ALLISON CHINCHAR, CNN METEOROLOGIST: A lot of everything, basically, it just depends where you are. Let's start in the west where snow is really going to be the main focus here. But on the eastern side of that storm, you're talking fire risk and even the potential for some strong to severe thunderstorms.
Here's a look at nearly a dozen States that are under winter weather advisories or winter storm warnings. And yes, in these higher elevations, we're talking an excessive a foot of snow. So, again, for those that get the snow, you're likely going to get quite a bit of it.
Now, here's a look at where a lot of those storms are. You can see the rain in the valley locations and the snow in the higher elevations. But again, this stretches all the way from Montana down through Arizona and New Mexico. That system is gradually going to make its way east. But as it does, out ahead of it, you've got very strong winds.
So, we've got those high wind warning, wind advisories, and even red flag warnings, because those winds gusts are expected to get up around that 70 to 75-mile-per-hour range. The concern here for some of these States is that's also going to increase the fire risk. Because it's not just the winds but also the very dry conditions on the ground.
Another concern is going to be the strong to severe thunderstorms. We've got that for portions of the upper Midwest, stretching down to the Central Plains and even a small portion of Texas, as well. The main threats here will be damaging winds and hail but we can't rule out the possibility of an isolated tornado or two.
[07:55:00]
The vast majority of the system in the west is going to be for the day today, finally pushing out late evening. In terms of the severe thunderstorms, most of those really don't ramp up until dinnertime tonight, continuing through the evening and overnight hours before that system finally begins to progress off to the east. There's also the chance for severe storms on Monday and Tuesday, as well, just in different locations, guys, as that system progresses.
SANCHEZ: You said it. A mixed bag to start the week. Allison Chinchar, thank you so much.
WALKER: I love that it's getting colder. It's sleeping with your socks on weather for me. Thanks for starting your morning with us, everyone.
SANCHEZ: Always good to be with you, Amara. "Inside Politics Sunday with Abby Phillips" starts in just a few minutes.
[08:00:00]
Load-Date: October 23, 2022



End of Document


Contaminated water in dorms sparks frustration, camaraderie among students
Emory Wheel: Emory University
October 23, 2022 Sunday

University Wire
Copyright 2022 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 881 words
Byline: Melina Ross
Body




October has officially arrived - the fragrance of wet leaves wafts through the air, autumn breezes chill the campus and a mysterious brown muck has tainted the water through some of the sink taps on Emory University's Atlanta campus. On the evening of Oct. 11, reports began to flood in. 
"I turned the hot water all the way up on my Turman sink, and brownish water began to come out," Turman Hall resident Chris Rivera-Bonilla (26C) said. "I let it run for a while, and the water was still a very cloudy white. I couldn't see through my clear water bottle."
On October 12, Emory Residence Life and Housing sent an email to students living in Harris Hall, Complex - which is made up of Hopkins, Smith and Thomas Halls - Few and Evans Halls and sorority lodges, saying the University was informed of an off-campus pipe break. The email stated that "it is possible that you may find discolored water in the taps of your room sink." Students were advised to "allow the hot and cold water to run until it is clear."
Harris Hall was among the dorms affected by contaminated water. Courtesy of Emory University
DeKalb County never issued a boil water advisory, so the water was safe to drink, according to Emory Residence Life. The email also noted that "Campus Services has worked diligently to 'flush' the building system," although students continued to report discolored water.
Not everyone in these resident halls were impacted - six Few and Evans residents told the Wheel that they did not see contaminated water. 
Assistant Vice President of University Communications and Marketing Laura Diamond wrote in an email to the Wheel that the water problems occurred when the "DeKalb County [Department of] Watershed [Management] flushed the main system, which led to a temporary, slight discoloration of water at a few locations across the county, including on Emory's campus." She added that sediment in the line caused the discoloration. 
Emory Ecological Society Vice President Nick Chang (24C) said Emory's explanation for the contaminated water was reasonable given his past experiences.
"In my experience, the [DeKalb County Watershed] is not great at communicating, so Emory being caught off guard by the flushing sounds incredibly likely," Chang said. "From what I understand, sediment accumulation in pipes is common and typically harmless, so I am inclined to believe this explanation."
Some Emory community members critiqued the way the University handled the situation, alleging a lack of transparency. Jake Weissman (24C) called the lack of information and clarity from a prestigious university like Emory "pretty ironic." 
"Emory upholds these high moral and ethical values and then does something like this," Weissman said.
Harris Hall resident Theo Hofmann (26C) agreed with Weissman.
"I was overall kind of annoyed at the fact that there was very little communication from the school about this issue and that we were just informed by our [resident advisors]," Hofmann said. "It was all very unclear."
However, Diamond clarified the University's response to the situation, which was rebuked by the Emory community. 
"If students noticed discolored water, they were advised to turn on the faucets and allow the water to run until it was clear," Diamond wrote. "As soon as DeKalb Watershed alerted Emory to the situation, we informed those in the few impacted buildings on campus."
Ambiguity initially surrounded the situation. When asked about whether or not they knew the cause of the discolorations, the students' speculations - which are now confirmed to be incorrect - ranged from iron oxide contamination in sewage to toxic chemicals in the water. 
''This speculation led to an understandable mix of fear and dismay,'' Weissman said.
However, the implications of the water contamination are not all bad, according to Harris Hall resident Stephen Trainer (26C). He reported an increased sense of hall rapport and community.
"It was something we could talk about, something to raise our fists against, something that kind of rallied the troops," Trainer said. 
In Harris Hall, residents Leia Marshall (26C) and Deanna Sharpe (26C) aided their fellow third-floor inhabitants by leaving water bottles at the doors of their dorms. Hofmann also fondly recalled going on trips with his hallmates to acquire water. 
Complex Sophomore Advisor Terrence Lurry (25C) noted that students who already had clean water offered it to other residents, while others offered showers and water to those residing in the affected halls. The water contamination also allowed for members of the Emory undergraduate community to have something to joke and complain about together, Hopkins Hall resident Ian Bower (26C) said, explaining that different people were able to find common ground.
"This response, however, does not leave Emory in the clear,'' Hofmann said. 
Water contamination is not a new issue on campus, according to Lurry. Last year as a member of hishall's Residence Hall Association executive board last year, Lurry said he attempted to resolve the same issue which occurred repeatedly. He added there was no communication to students affected by water discoloration last year.
"I brought the issue up with Emory, and they then contacted maintenance, but after that, it sort of fell flat," Lurry said. 
Load-Date: October 23, 2022



End of Document


Homeland Security IG: 'FEMA Did Not Effectively Manage Disaster Case Management Program Funds in Support of Hurricane Maria Recovery Services'
Targeted News Service
October 23, 2022 Sunday 7:30 AM  EST

Copyright 2022 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 1186 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




(TNSrep) -- The Homeland Security Inspector General issued the following report (No. OIG-22-77) on Sept. 29, 2022, entitled "FEMA Did Not Effectively Manage Disaster Case Management Program Funds in Support of Hurricane Maria Recovery Services."
Here are excerpts:
* * *
MEMORANDUM FOR: The Honorable Deanne Criswell, Administrator, Federal Emergency Management Agency
FROM: Joseph V. Cuffari, Ph.D., Inspector General
SUBJECT: FEMA Did Not Effectively Manage Disaster Case Management Program Funds in Support of Hurricane Maria Recovery Services
For your action is our final report, FEMA Did Not Effectively Manage Disaster Case Management Program Funds in Support of Hurricane Maria Recovery Services. We incorporated the formal comments provided by your office.
The report contains three recommendations to improve management of program funds. Your office did not concur with our three recommendations. Based on information provided in your response to the draft report, we consider all three recommendations unresolved and open. As prescribed by Department of Homeland Security Directive 077-01, Follow-Up and Resolution for Office of Inspector General Report Recommendations, within 90 days of the date of this memorandum, please provide our office with a written response that includes your ( 1) agreement or disagreement, (2) corrective action plan, and (3) target completion date for each recommendation. Also, please include responsible parties and any other supporting documentation necessary to inform us about the current status of the recommendations. Until your response is received and evaluated, the recommendations will be considered unresolved and open.
Once your office has fully implemented the recommendations, please submit a formal closeout letter to us within 30 days so that we may close the recommendations. The memorandum should be accompanied by evidence of completion of agreed-upon corrective actions and the disposition of any monetary amounts. Please send your response to OIGAuditsFollowup@oig.dhs.gov
Consistent with our responsibility under the Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended, we will provide copies of our report to congressional committees with oversight and appropriation responsibility over the Department of Homeland Security. We will post the report on our website for public dissemination. Please call me with any questions, or your staff may contact Bruce Miller, Deputy Inspector General for Audits, at (202) 981-6000.
Attachment
* * *
HIGHLIGHTS
Why We Did This Audit
The objective of this audit was to determine to what extent FEMA managed the PR-DCMP funds in accordance with Federal regulations and FEMA program requirements. FEMA awarded $72.8 million in DCMP funds to nine Providers in Puerto Rico. Our scope encompassed $65 million paid to eight of the nine Providers.
What We Recommend
We made three recommendations to FEMA to improve the management of
DCMP funds.
What We Found
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) did not manage Puerto Rico Disaster Case Management Program (PR-DCMP) funds in accordance with Federal regulations and FEMA program requirements. According to Federal regulations, non-Federal entities must support accumulation of costs and provide adequate documentation to support costs charged to a Federal award. However, FEMA did not require six DCMP nonprofit organizations (Providers) to provide supporting documentation for actual costs. Instead, FEMA made advance payments totaling $6.4 million to six Providers based on estimates, rather than reconciling the payments with actual costs. Additionally, FEMA lacked supporting documentation for Providers totaling $10.7 million.
This occurred because FEMA did not have adequate internal controls for separation of duties, written policies and procedures for oversight when the state is not the recipient, or records management. As a result, FEMA has no assurance that $17.1 million paid to eight Providers was DCMP-related and necessary to perform DCMP activities. Additionally, FEMA cannot ensure the remaining $47.9 million in costs is adequately supported, thereby increasing the risk of fraud, waste, and abuse of funds.
FEMA Response
FEMA did not concur with our three recommendations. We included a copy of FEMA's comments in Appendix B.
* * *
Conclusion
FEMA did not manage the $65 million in PR-DCMP funds in accordance with Federal regulations and FEMA program requirements. Because it administered the PR-DCMP services through eight Providers with cooperative agreements, FEMA served as both the managing and oversight entity. As the oversight entity, FEMA did not establish adequate internal controls for separation of duties, written policies and procedures when the state is not the recipient, or records management. As a result, FEMA has no assurance that $17.1 million paid to Providers was all DCMP-related and necessary to perform DCMP activities. Additionally, FEMA cannot ensure the remaining $47.9 million of DCMP-related costs are adequately supported, thereby increasing the risk of fraud, waste, and abuse of funds.
Subsequent Event - Hurricane Fiona Hurricane Fiona struck the southwest coast of Puerto Rico on September 18, 2022, 5 years after Hurricane Maria devastated the Island. The President approved a major disaster declaration on September 21. Hurricane Fiona resulted in an island-wide power outage and boil water advisory. This report focused on DCMP services provided to assist residents of Puerto Rico recover from the effects of Hurricane Maria. The OIG will conduct additional work in FY 2023 on FEMA's continuing public assistance provided to Puerto Rico in response to Hurricane Maria during the intervening 5 years and will evaluate how Puerto Rico used Federal public assistance funds to prepare for future weather-related events./11
* * *
Recommendations
Recommendation 1: We recommend the Federal Emergency Management Agency Region II Administrator establish internal controls to ensure proper separation of duties related to the review, approval, and disbursement of Disaster Case Management Program funds to prevent potential fraud, waste, and abuse.
Recommendation 2: We recommend the Federal Emergency Management Agency Administrator establish policies and procedures for the Disaster Case Management Program when the program is not awarded to the State or Territory. The policies should address how FEMA will perform oversight and monitoring and how FEMA will ensure that standards for financial management systems and compliance with the Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards (2 C.F.R. Pt. 200) are met.
Recommendation 3: We recommend the Federal Emergency Management Agency Region II Administrator review all documentation supporting the $65 million Disaster Case Management Program reimbursements to the Providers and ensure the documentation is adequate and in accordance with 2 C.F.R. Sec. 200.302(b)(3), 200.400(d), and 200.403(g).
* * *
The report is posted at: https://www.oig.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/assets/2022-10/OIG-22-77-Sep22.pdf
Copyright Targeted News Services
MSTRUCK-7979801 MSTRUCK
Load-Date: October 24, 2022



End of Document


Discolored water in dorms sparks frustration, camaraderie among students
Emory Wheel: Emory University
October 23, 2022 Sunday

University Wire
Copyright 2022 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 905 words
Byline: Melina Ross
Body




October has officially arrived - the fragrance of wet leaves wafts through the air, autumn breezes chill the campus and a mysterious brown muck has tainted the water through some of the sink taps on Emory University's Atlanta campus. On the evening of Oct. 11, reports began to flood in. 
"I turned the hot water all the way up on my Turman sink, and brownish water began to come out," Turman Hall resident Chris Rivera-Bonilla (26C) said. "I let it run for a while, and the water was still a very cloudy white. I couldn't see through my clear water bottle."
On October 12, Emory Residence Life and Housing sent an email to students living in Harris Hall, Complex - which is made up of Hopkins, Smith and Thomas Halls - Few and Evans Halls and sorority lodges, saying the University was informed of an off-campus pipe break. The email stated that "it is possible that you may find discolored water in the taps of your room sink." Students were advised to "allow the hot and cold water to run until it is clear."
Harris Hall was among the dorms affected by discolored water. Courtesy of Emory University
DeKalb County never issued a boil water advisory, so the water was safe to drink, according to Emory Residence Life. The email also noted that "Campus Services has worked diligently to 'flush' the building system," although students continued to report discolored water.
Not everyone in these resident halls were impacted - six Few and Evans residents told the Wheel that they did not see discolored water. 
Assistant Vice President of University Communications and Marketing Laura Diamond wrote in an email to the Wheel that the water problems occurred when the "DeKalb County [Department of] Watershed [Management] flushed the main system, which led to a temporary, slight discoloration of water at a few locations across the county, including on Emory's campus." She added that sediment in the line caused the discoloration. 
Emory Ecological Society Vice President Nick Chang (24C) said Emory's explanation for the discolored water was reasonable given his past experiences.
"In my experience, the [DeKalb County Watershed] is not great at communicating, so Emory being caught off guard by the flushing sounds incredibly likely," Chang said. "From what I understand, sediment accumulation in pipes is common and typically harmless, so I am inclined to believe this explanation."
Some Emory community members critiqued the way the University handled the situation, alleging a lack of transparency. Jake Weissman (24C) called the lack of information and clarity from a prestigious university like Emory "pretty ironic." 
"Emory upholds these high moral and ethical values and then does something like this," Weissman said.
Harris Hall resident Theo Hofmann (26C) agreed with Weissman.
"I was overall kind of annoyed at the fact that there was very little communication from the school about this issue and that we were just informed by our [resident advisors]," Hofmann said. "It was all very unclear."
However, Diamond clarified the University's response to the situation, which was rebuked by the Emory community. 
"If students noticed discolored water, they were advised to turn on the faucets and allow the water to run until it was clear," Diamond wrote. "As soon as DeKalb Watershed alerted Emory to the situation, we informed those in the few impacted buildings on campus."
Ambiguity initially surrounded the situation. When asked about whether or not they knew the cause of the discolorations, the students' speculations - which are now confirmed to be incorrect - ranged from iron oxide contamination in sewage to toxic chemicals in the water. 
''This speculation led to an understandable mix of fear and dismay,'' Weissman said.
However, the implications of the water discoloration are not all bad, according to Harris Hall resident Stephen Trainer (26C). He reported an increased sense of hall rapport and community.
"It was something we could talk about, something to raise our fists against, something that kind of rallied the troops," Trainer said. 
In Harris Hall, residents Leia Marshall (26C) and Deanna Sharpe (26C) aided their fellow third-floor inhabitants by leaving water bottles at the doors of their dorms. Hofmann also fondly recalled going on trips with his hallmates to acquire water. 
Complex Sophomore Advisor Terrence Lurry (25C) noted that students who already had clean water offered it to other residents, while others offered showers and water to those residing in the affected halls. The water discoloration also allowed for members of the Emory undergraduate community to have something to joke and complain about together, Hopkins Hall resident Ian Bower (26C) said, explaining that different people were able to find common ground.
"This response, however, does not leave Emory in the clear,'' Hofmann said. 
Water discoloration is not a new issue on campus, according to Lurry. Last year as a member of hishall's Residence Hall Association executive board last year, Lurry said he attempted to resolve the same issue which occurred repeatedly. He added there was no communication to students affected by water discoloration last year.
"I brought the issue up with Emory, and they then contacted maintenance, but after that, it sort of fell flat," Lurry said. 
Update (10/24/22 at 12:54 p.m.): A previous version of this article stated that this the water was contaminated. In fact, it the water was discolored. 
Load-Date: October 24, 2022



End of Document


Visiting JSU crowds put strain on Jackson water system, mayor says
Newstex Blogs 
Mississippi Today
October 24, 2022 Monday 11:06 PM EST

Copyright 2022 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 821 words
Byline: Alex Rozier
Body




Oct 24, 2022( Mississippi Today: https://mississippitoday.org Delivered by Newstex)  
 Jackson Mayor Chokwe Antar Lumumba cautioned at a Monday press conference that capital city residents should be conscious of their water consumption as another large flock of visitors is expected at Jackson State University's football game this coming weekend. 
Lumumba said there was an increased demand for water this last weekend as people travelled into the city for JSU's homecoming game. The extra consumption put pressure on the city's water distribution system, the mayor said, which was dealing with water line leaks. On Saturday, the city issued a boil water notice for 380 connections in southwest Jackson.  
The mayor called it a 'very difficult weekend' for the water system, and even warned residents of the potential for a citywide boil water notice if there's too much demand on the already fragile treatment plants.  
'I want to provide this warning: we're expecting a large number of people to come in this weekend as well as Jackson State prepares for its rivalry game with Southern University,' Lumumba said. 'We're asking that people be cognizant, that people be considerate over their consumption. Don't use more than what you need to use, as increased demand and the pressure on our water treatment facilities could actually cause challenges with our water pressure, and if the water pressure drops significantly enough then we might find ourselves in a citywide boil water notice again.' 

Sign up for text alerts on the water crisis 

As the extra consumption put pressure on the surface water delivery system, which serves most residents, well system customers also saw interruptions after a motor pump failure[1] by Highway 18. Lumumba said the city made an emergency purchase for a new pump with the Environmental Protection Agency's approval, and that the city slowly restored water pressure over the weekend.  
 The mayor also discussed new funding opportunities for the water system, some that have already been allocated and some that the city is applying for: 
$5 million the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers provided through the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act.$20 million from Congress' continuing resolution to fund the federal government.$4 million through state and private assistance grants through the EPA.$71 million Jackson has applied for through state allocation of the American Rescue Plan Act.Up to $50 million the city is pursuing through the Federal Emergency Management Agency's Building Resilient Infrastructure and Communities grant program.  
Get the latest updates on the Jackson water crisis. 
 Processing Success! You're on the list. Whoops! There was an error and we couldn't process your subscription. Please reload the page and try again.  

Lumumba also referenced plans the city has had to decommission J.H. Fewell, the city's secondary water treatment plant. While the city will still look to replace Fewell at some point, he said those plans are 'a long way away' as the city needs the plant's production to 'make up the difference' with what O.B. Curtis can produce. 
'That is the long-term vision, and it increasingly appears to be the long-term vision to create a new water treatment facility in its entirety, even moving away from O.B. Curtis,' the mayor said. 'But J.H. Fewell is more than 100 years old, there are parts and equipment at J.H. Fewell that are completely obsolete and will never be repaired. But today, we don't have the luxury of moving away from J.H. Fewell.'  
Lumumba added that the city's request for proposals for a contractor to operate the city's water facilities will go until Nov. 7, and that he expects the contract to start on Nov.17. He continued to dispute Gov. Tate Reeves' assertion that Lumumba had left the state's Unified Command Structure established to assist in the Jackson water crisis, saying that he met with the team earlier Monday.  

We got you covered. 
We're keeping you informed with the latest on the Jackson water crisis. You can help sustain this news by donating any amount today to join the Mississippi Today member community. 

 We want to hear from you! 
 By listening more intently and understanding the people who make up Mississippi's communities, our reporters put a human face on how policy affects everyday Mississippians. We're listening closely to our readers to help us continue to align our work with the needs and priorities of people from all across Mississippi. Please take a few minutes to tell us what's on your mind by clicking the button below. 

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0/ 
Republish our articles for free, online or in print, under a Creative Commons license. 

Are you concerned about the Jackson water crisis? 
Please take a few minutes to share your thoughts. 
 [ 1]: https://www.wjtv.com/news/jacksons-water-crisis/crews-work-to-restore-water-to-highway-18-tanks-in-jackson/ 
Link to the original story.
Notes



The views expressed in any and all content distributed by Newstex and its re-distributors (collectively, the "Newstex Authoritative Content") are solely those of the respective author(s) and not necessarily the views of Newstex or its re-distributors. Stories from such authors are provided "AS IS," with no warranties, and confer no rights. The material and information provided in Newstex Authoritative Content are for general information only and should not, in any respect, be relied on as professional advice. Newstex Authoritative Content is not "read and approved" before it is posted. Accordingly, neither Newstex nor its re-distributors make any claims, promises or guarantees about the accuracy, completeness, or adequacy of the information contained therein or linked to from such content, nor do they take responsibility for any aspect of such content. The Newstex Authoritative Content shall be construed as author-based content and commentary. Accordingly, no warranties or other guarantees are offered as to the quality of the opinions, commentary or anything else appearing in such Newstex Authoritative Content. Newstex and its re-distributors expressly reserve the right to delete stories at its and their sole discretion.
Load-Date: October 24, 2022



End of Document


EPA, DOJ THREATEN SDWA ACTION OVER JACKSON, MS, WATER CRISIS
Water Policy Report
October 24, 2022

Copyright 2022 Inside Washington Publishers All Rights Reserved
Length: 787 words
Body




 Posted September 27, 2022 
EPA and the Department of Justice (DOJ) are threatening to launch a Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) enforcement action over the drinking water crisis in Jackson, MS, while inviting officials in the majority-minority city to negotiate an enforceable agreement to resolve the issue.
Any agreement could be aided by $20 million in pending must-pass spending legislation that is earmarked for an "emergency" project.
EPA Administrator Michael Regan returned to Jackson for the second time this month, this time with DOJ's Environment & Natural Resources Division chief Todd Kim, to meet with Jackson Mayor Chokwe Anta Lumumba (D) and announce a probe into the matter.
"The people of Jackson, like all people in this country, deserve access to clean and safe water," Regan said in a Sept. 26 statement. "They also deserve more than words."
DOJ's Kim also sent a Sept. 26 letter to Lumumba and other city officials, saying he believes "an imminent and substantial endangerment to human health exists, as evidenced by the roughly 300 boil water notices" issued over the last two years as well as the recent crisis that cut off water access to most residents for many days.
DOJ is seeking to "engage in immediate negotiations" while warning the department is "prepared to file an action against the city" under SDWA but hopes the matter can "be resolved with an enforceable agreement" in the best interest of all parties, says the letter, which was first reported by WLBT-TV.
A judicially enforceable settlement would need to address the city's alleged failures to adequately staff water treatment plants, to implement an alternative water supply plan pursuant to an EPA emergency order, to comply with timelines for filter rehabilitation, to install corrosion control as required under the agency's Lead & Copper rule and alleged exceedances of single and monthly turbidity limits, the letter says.
Further, the city must address allegations of Clean Water Act violations at its wastewater system as well as violations of an earlier consent decree lodged in federal court in the state.
Kim seeks a fast response, by Sept. 28, if the city wants to pursue settlement discussions.
Regan also reinforced the push for a legal settlement, according to the Associated Press.
Regan said the people of Jackson "have lacked access to safe and reliable water for decades. After years of neglect, Jackson's water system finally reached a breaking point this summer, leaving tens of thousands of people without any running water for weeks," conditions that are "unacceptable."
"It's clear this community has suffered long enough," he said.
The mayor's office appears receptive to a settlement, with Lumumba saying coordination with the federal government represents the best path forward to fix the water system. "We believe that it is imperative that we enter into agreements with a team that is solely and sincerely focused on an objective of ensuring safe and reliability drinking water to the residents of Jackson," he said in a statement.
A DOJ spokesperson declined to specify to the AP what an agreement could include but said the purpose of the meeting was to discuss how the federal government could help address "longstanding environmental justice issues" facing the city.
Meanwhile, the stop-gap budget measure being considered this week in the Senate contains $20 million that could be used to help fix the city's water system. While the bill is expected to fail due to an attached "permitting side deal" opposed by many Democrats and Republicans, it is expected to eventually pass once the permit reform language is stripped out.
Most of Jackson's 150,000 residents lost access to running water for several days this month after heavy rainfall impacted the city's main water treatment plant. EPA had already issued a January warning that the system violates SDWA.
On Sept. 15, Mississippi Gov. Tate Reeves (R) lifted the boil-water order but Lumumba issued a new notice on Sept. 26 for 1,000 water connections after a contractor accidentally cut a water line.
Also, EPA's Office of Inspector General (OIG) is conducting oversight of EPA infrastructure funds in the city as well as the state's administration of key water infrastructure funding programs, which require a 20 percent state match. The Sept. 13 announcement indicated OIG was sending personnel to the city to collect data and conduct interviews.
This was Regan's second visit to Jackson this month after traveling to the city in early September to discuss the water problems. Then he said the city needs to receive "its fair share" of federal money to repair the water system. Regan said the EPA has a responsibility to protect the health of Jackson residents.
Load-Date: October 24, 2022



End of Document


GOVERNOR RON DESANTIS ISSUES UPDATES ON HURRICANE IAN RECOVERY ON OCTOBER 24, 2022
States News Service
October 24, 2022 Monday

Copyright 2022 States News Service
Length: 3097 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: TALLAHASSEE, FL 
Body




The following information was released by the office of the Governor of Florida:
Today, Governor Ron DeSantis highlighted the achievements of Florida's students thanks to Florida's efforts to keep kids in schools. At the peak of Hurricane Ian, 59 school districts were closed, and in less than three weeks, all districts opened to get kids back in the classroom. Following Hurricane Ian, the Florida Department of Education and Commissioner Manny Diaz Jr. worked with the School District of Lee County to ensure they had the resources for students to return to school.
The Florida Disaster Fund has raised nearly $50 million since activation to provide financial assistance to our communities as they respond to and recover from times of emergency or disaster. To read more, click here. To contribute, visit www.FloridaDisasterFund.org or text DISASTER to 20222.
First Lady Casey DeSantis has worked to expand mental health in response to Hurricane Ian. State Disaster Recovery Mental Health Coordinator, Sara Newhouse, compiled a comprehensive webpage of resources to help navigate available resources for mental health needs post hurricane. To visit the site, click here.
To guide Floridians looking for their next-steps, FloridaStormRelief.com serves as a one-stop-shop to navigate all available assistance. Here you can find a check list for recovery following Hurricane Ian, resources for businesses, and ways to help Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian.
State response efforts include:
Florida Division of Emergency Management (FDEM)
FDEM is collecting information to assist disaster survivors who have critical unmet needs due to Hurricane Ian. Disaster survivors can fill out the voluntary Unmet Needs Resident Survey in English or Spanish.
At the request of Governor DeSantis, FDEM worked with federal partners to secure an additional 30 days of 100% federal cost share for Public Assistance Category A (debris removal) and Category B (emergency protective measures) for Hurricane Ian recovery efforts. More information can be found here.
Impacted residents can apply at DisasterAssistance.gov or visit an open Disaster Recovery Center (DRC).
FDEM worked with the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) to make long-term, low-interest disaster loans available to cover losses not fully compensated by insurance and other sources. Individuals can apply online using the Electronic Loan Application on the SBA's secure website at DisasterLoanAssistance.SBA.gov. Information and applications can also be obtained by calling 800-659-2955 or by visiting a Business Recovery Center.
More than 10,650 Blue Roofs have been installed by the US Army Corps of Engineers. For more information, visit blueroof.us or call 1-888-ROOF-BLU.
FDEM is mobilizing generators and water pumps for Sanibel Island as infrastructure inspections are completed and facilities can begin operation.
FDEM is working with St. Augustine maintenance crews to begin restoration of impacted dunes to be completed before turtle nesting season.
Nearly 500 STARLINK Units have been distributed to businesses and responders in impacted communities to provide Internet connection.
FDEM has authorized 303 Debris Management Sites to reduce and remove debris from impacted areas.
Internet Connectivity
If you are a Xfinity customer experiencing internet connectivity issues and live in a predominately restored location, the lines delivering service to your home may be damaged. Please go to the Status Center, your Xfinity App or call 1-800-XFINITY (1-800-934-6489) to report your service interruption.
ATandT is waiving talk, text, and data overage charges for ATandT Postpaid and PREPAID customers with billing addresses in 828 zip codes across Florida from September 28, 2022, through October 28, 2022.
ATandT is welcoming other carriers' customers to roam on its networks so they can connect, even if their carrier's service isn't available after the storm. Since opening the ATandT network last week for roaming, we've handled about 47 TBs (equal to 16 billion text messages) of traffic from other carriers to help keep those in impacted areas connected.
Comcast has Xfinity WiFi vans to provide free internet connectivity as communities continue to recover from Hurricane Ian. The vans are available from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily, located at:
Walmart Supercenter, 1619 Del Prado Boulevard South, Cape Coral, FL
Bonita Springs Public Library, 2687 Pine Ave., Bonita Springs, FL
Walmart Supercenter, 17105 San Carlos Blvd., Fort Myers, FL
Walmart Neighborhood Market (Charlotte Square) at 2150 Tamiami Trail, Port Charlotte, FL
Verizon customers and small business customers in Charlotte, Collier, Desoto, Hardee, Lee, and Sarasota counties will continue to receive unlimited calling, texting, and mobile data through October 31, 2022, in counties.
Verizon has deployed Wireless Emergency Connection Centers (WECCs) to assist Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian with wi-fi, phone batteries, and charging stations. These stations are available to any customer of any carrier stay connected. WECCs are available at the following locations:
Fort Myers Town Hall, 2525 Estero Boulevard, Fort Myers Beach, FL 33931
Lakes Regional Library 15290 Bass Road, Fort Myers, FL 33919
Fishers of Men Lutheran Church, 10360 Stringfellow Rd, St James City, FL 33956
Additionally, charging pedestals are available at the following locations:
Estero Community Center, 9200 Corkscrew Palms Boulevard, Estero, FL 33928
North Collier Regional Park, 15000 Livingston Road, Naples, FL 34116
Lumen customers with either CenturyLink or Quantum Fiber services experiencing outages can visit https://www.centurylink.com/home/help.html or call 1-800-201-4099 to report outages.
To report a trouble ticket for the Quantum Fiber service, customers can chat by visiting https://www.quantumfiber.com/support.html or calling 1-833-250-6306.
Lumen has set up three 24/7 Wi-Fi locations for its CenturyLink and Quantum Fiber customers. The free Wi-Fi locations include:
4001 Palm Tree Boulevard, Cape Coral, FL 33904
10546 Tipton Drive, Bokeelia, FL 33922
4195 Kings Highway, Port Charlotte, FL 33980
Health and Human Services
DOH and DCF partnered with BetterHelp to offer three months of free mental health services via online therapy to those impacted by Hurricane Ian. To access these free services, visit betterhelp.com/voucher and enter code: HurricaneIan . Visitors to BetterHelp's site will be prompted to answer a questionnaire that will match those impacted residents with a licensed mental health professional.
Boil Water Notices have been issued for 27 areas, over 8 counties.
DOH has waived costs for any vital statistics, such as birth and death certificates.
Infrastructure
Tolls at Alligator Alley, Sunshine Skyway, and Pinellas Bayway will be reinstated at 11:59 p.m. Monday, October 24.
Initial debris pick-up:
4,604 miles of state roads have been completed statewide.
Statewide 114,904 cubic yards of vegetation debris have been picked up.
Roads Closed as of 11 a.m. on 10/24/22
DeSoto County
NW 2nd Bunker Avenue at Arrowhead Pond Road Lane closed, both directions
Hardee County
SR-64 from Brantwood Drive to Wilbur C King Boulevard Lane closed, both directions
Mass Care
DCF launched the Disaster Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (D-SNAP), which is being implemented in phases by county. Phase three will start on October 24 and includes Hillsborough, Lake, Osceola, Putnam, Seminole, and Volusia counties. Pre-registration is required by all applicants.
To expedite service to eligible households, DCF is offering phone interviews through the D-SNAP Call Center. Details can be found online here.
As of October 23, DCF has disbursed $69.7 million to more than 112,000 households.
DOEA and FDOT have partnered to provide transportation to displaced seniors in Southwest Florida. Call 1-800-96-Elder for assistance.
DCF has two Family Resource Support Centers in Deltona and New Smyrna Beach to help individuals and families. More information can be found at MyFLFamilies.com/FRSC.
Law Enforcement
DCF has created a First Responder Support Line (407-823-1657). This line combines current resources into a single point of contact that will connect first responders with mental health professionals.
Peer support is available 24/7 to all FHP members and their families through FHP's Peer Support Team and the FHP Wellness App to support their overall wellness.
FLHSMV has deployed Florida Licensing on Wheels (FLOW) mobile units to Lee, Charlotte, Sarasota, and Collier counties to provide no-fee replacements for driver license and identification credentials, vehicle registrations, and titles.
Dates, locations, and hours of operation for FLOW mobiles are subject to change and will be announced on FLHSMV.gov.
As of October 23, more than 5,100 customers have been served since operations began.
FHP encourages motorists to report disabled vehicles or dangerous driving conditions to *FHP (*347).
FLHSMV driver license and motor vehicle service center closures can be found here.
FWC has established a Hurricane Ian Vessel Hotline for vessel and property owners affected by vessels displaced by Hurricane Ian. More than 2,100 vessels have been assessed by displaced vessel teams.
For more information about displaced vessels or derelict vessels in state waters call 850-488-5600.
FWC cautions all boaters to exercise extreme caution in waterways in areas affected by Hurricane Ian and encourages boaters to report missing or damaged waterway markers by calling 866-405-2869 or by filling out an online form here.
Private Sector Support
The Florida Housing Finance Corporation is awarding $5 million to local housing partners to help Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian pay their home insurance deductibles. Funding assistance is available to individuals, and families in Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Hardee, Lee, and Sarasota counties who apply and qualify. Homeowners can contact their local Housing Initiatives Partnership program office directly for more information.
Florida was approved for $30 million for the National Dislocated Worker Grant for Floridians without work due to Hurricane Ian, which DEO applied for through the U.S. Department of Labor on October 4, 2022.
DEO staff and volunteers are providing in-person services and surging resources to five Disaster Recover Center locations located in Lee, Charlotte, Sarasota, and Collier Counties. Locations for DRCs are available here.
Business Recovery Centers, represented by the U.S. Small Business Administration and the Florida Small Business Development Center network.
Uber is offering free round-trip rides, up to $30 each way, to and from 10 state-approved Disaster Recovery Centers (DRC). Details on how to redeem a free round trip to and from a state-approved DRC are available here.
Some requirements for Reemployment Assistance have been temporarily waived in FEMA disaster-declared counties. Eligible Floridians must file state Reemployment Assistance before Disaster Unemployment Assistance (DUA). Learn more here.
Over 16,700 DUA claims have been submitted since DUA was activated and more than 8,200 have been approved.
DEO has deployed personnel and extended call center hours to seven days per week. Additionally, DEO secured six ID.me kiosks and support technicians to reduce the number of fraudulent claims. DEO is expanding the number of agents available to review and process claims.
DEO and CareerSource Florida have activated the disaster recovery jobs portal to connect businesses and individuals impacted by Hurricane Ian with workforce programs.
All career centers are open statewide. To find your local career center, visit Find Your Local Team or Career Center Directory.
The Florida Small Business Emergency Bridge Loan Program has been activated to assist small businesses that have been impacted by Hurricane Ian with short-term, zero-interest loans to meet the businesses' immediate financial needs. Click here to learn more.
An eligibility requirement of this program was waived to allow sole proprietors in the Marine Fisheries Industry with businesses located in Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Hardee, Lee, and Sarasota counties. Learn more here.
DEO is updating www.FloridaDisaster.biz with real-time information for business owners, their families, and employees for Hurricane Ian.
DEO's Rebuild Florida team continues to work with homeowners to assess any damage that may have occurred to Hurricane Irma projects from Hurricane Ian. The team continues to rotate deployed staff to Ian-impacted areas, supporting recovery efforts.
Enterprise Florida activated its Disaster Assistance page with state and federal resources available for businesses to recover.
Airbnb launched a website to help with relocation efforts for impacted residents here. This page features properties that are available outside of the FEMA Disaster zones.
For displaced residents of Lee and Charlotte counties, Airbnb is working with nonprofit partners to offer vouchers for temporary housing. To learn more, click here.
Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
304 Disaster Debris Management Sites have been authorized to operate for Hurricane Ian, including 72 in Lee, Charlotte and Sarasota counties to expedite clean-up, reducing environmental and public health impacts, and meeting federal reimbursement requirements.
DEP staff are on the ground assessing water and wastewater infrastructure, with resources from FlaWARN, US Army Corps of Engineers, local utilities and the Division of Emergency Management's contractor.
DEP issued an Emergency Final Order waiving permitting requirements for the storage and processing of solid waste, including storm debris.
DEP has also issued an Emergency Final Order to expedite necessary repair, replacement and restoration of structures, equipment, surface water management systems, works and other systems damaged by the storm.
Licensing
DBPR Emergency Order 2022-04 waives the application fees associated with relocating or reopening certain businesses, including the addition of branch locations regulated by the Department or by any board, commission or division of the Department, where relocation or reopening arises from damages caused by Hurricane Ian in the listed counties.
DBPR Emergency Order 2022-03 waives the requirement for certified or registered, general, building, or residential contractors to subcontract roofing work for the repair or installation of any roof type in listed counties.
Temporary Veterinarian License Application: The Florida Board of Veterinary Medicine has a 30-Day Temporary Veterinarian License available to out-of-state veterinarians to provide relief veterinary services in Florida.
Florida licensed veterinarians interested in offering volunteer services should contact Florida Vet Corp for information at 1-800-HELP-FLA (1-800-435-7352).
DBPR Emergency Order 2022-01 extends the renewal deadline to October 31, 2022, for multiple licenses, and extends the deadline for the filing of monthly reports and returns by certain alcoholic beverage and tobacco license holders to October 31, 2022.
Insurance
OIR is requiring insurers to report preliminary catastrophe claims for Hurricane Ian. To date, insurers have reported a total of $ 6,611,269,392 in estimated insured losses and a total of 564,399 claims. Additional claim data and information can be found here.
The Department of Revenue issued an Emergency Order, extending certain filing due dates for Florida businesses in counties impacted by Hurricane Ian. The September 2022 and October 2022 reporting periods are extended to November 23, 2022, for sales and use tax, reemployment tax and several other tax types. Those businesses affected by this order or impacted by the storm may contact Taxpayer Services at (850) 488-6800 or by email at GTAHurricaneHelp@Floridarevenue.com with questions.
OIR issued Emergency Order 300997-22-EO regarding the extension of grace periods, limitations on cancellations and nonrenewals, deemers and limitations on "use and file" filings.
OIR instituted a data call to collect catastrophe claims data related to Hurricane Ian. OIR is requiring daily catastrophe claims reporting for Hurricane Ian to assist with determining the impact on Florida's insurance industry. More information is available here.
Elections Update
At the request of the Supervisors of Elections in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties, and at the recommendation of Secretary of State Cord Byrd, the Governor signed Executive Order 22-234, which will help ensure adequate access to Florida's 2022 General Election ballot for the voters of Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties.
The Governor's Executive Order includes provisions authorizing the Supervisors of Elections in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties to:
Extend the number of days for early voting and designate additional early voting locations. The early voting period may begin as early as Monday, October 24, 2022, and can extend through Election Day, November 8, 2022.
Allow voters in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties to request by phone that their vote-by-mail ballot be mailed to an address other than their address of record. Voters must still provide an appropriate form of identification in the same manner as absent uniform service and overseas voters.
Designate and provide notice of the locations for secure ballot intake stations and relocate and consolidate polling locations as necessary.
Increase the pool of eligible poll workers who may serve within Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties by making eligible any poll workers previously trained for the 2020 election cycle and thereafter and by encouraging state employees to serve as poll workers in these counties.
Governor DeSantis also directed all state agencies to render aid and assistance as needed by the Supervisors of Elections in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties. Secretary Byrd and the Department of State assessed the need for these provisions based on extensive outreach to Florida's Supervisors of Elections.
Secretary Byrd and the Division of Elections leadership conducted continuous outreach and assessed the needs and readiness of counties in or around Hurricane Ian's path, including: Charlotte, Citrus, Collier, DeSoto, Dixie, Flagler, Gilchrist, Hardee, Hernando, Highlands, Hillsborough, Lafayette, Lake, Lee, Levy, Manatee, Orange, Osceola, Pasco, Pinellas, Polk, Putnam, Sarasota, Seminole, St. Johns, Taylor, and Volusia counties. Secretary Byrd also personally visited the hardest hit areas, including Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Lee, Hardee, and Sarasota counties to meet with their Supervisors of Elections in-person.
###
Load-Date: October 24, 2022



End of Document


Water investigations said to test Biden racial equity pledge
Associated Press State & Local
October 25, 2022 Tuesday 7:51 PM GMT

Copyright 2022 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS; POLITICAL NEWS; STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 767 words
Byline: EMILY WAGSTER PETTUS, Associated Press
Dateline: JACKSON, Miss. 
Body




JACKSON, Miss. (AP) — Federal investigations into public spending on the failing water system in Mississippi's majority-Black capital city are a test of President Joe Biden's commitment to racial equity, one of his congressional allies told hundreds of people at a town hall meeting hosted by the NAACP.
“President Biden has made a fundamental policy in his administration to talk about equity. And this is an issue of equity and fair treatment about the citizens of Jackson," Democratic Rep. Bennie Thompson said Monday night at Jackson's New Hope Baptist Church — the same spacious sanctuary where Biden spoke during the 2020 campaign.
The Environmental Protection Agency announced Thursday that it is investigating whether Mississippi state agencies have discriminated against Jackson by refusing to fund water system improvements in the city of 150,000, where more than 80% of residents are Black and about a quarter of the population lives in poverty.
Thompson said the EPA civil investigation is expected to take about four months. The federal agency could withhold money from the state if it finds wrongdoing — potentially millions of dollars. If the state agencies don’t cooperate with the investigation, the EPA could refer the case to the Department of Justice.
Thompson's congressional district includes most of Jackson. He is chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee — one of two congressional committees that also are investigating how Republican-led Mississippi is spending federal money for water system improvements, and whether some of the money will go to Jackson.
Biden spoke at Jackson's New Hope Baptist Church during a worship service in March 2020 as he was seeking the Democratic nomination for president. Biden was fresh off a win in South Carolina's Democratic primary, where Black voters gave him a crucial boost — and Thompson introduced the former vice president at New Hope as the “Comeback Kid.”
“If I’m the Comeback Kid, there’s only one reason I’ve come back — the African-American community all around the country," Biden told the mostly Black congregation in Mississippi. He also pledged to look out for people who had been marginalized, isolated and oppressed.
Speaking of Biden on Monday, Thompson said: “I’m going to continue to make him a man of his word. He sat right here on the front pew and asked people to support him, and a lot of us did. And so now, it’s a matter of making sure that promises made are promises kept.”
Jackson has struggled with water system problems for years, and most of the city lost running water for several days in late August and early September after torrential rainfall exacerbated problems at the main water treatment facility. Republican Mississippi Gov. Tate Reeves declared an emergency Aug. 29, and the state health department and the Mississippi Emergency Management Agency have been overseeing operations and repairs at the facility since then.
By the time Reeves issued the emergency order, Jackson residents had already been told for a month to boil their water to kill possible contaminants. Volunteers and the National Guard had distributed millions of bottles of drinking water. Although the boil-water notice was lifted in mid-September, many residents remain skeptical about water safety.
In a federal complaint Sept. 27, the NAACP said Mississippi officials “all but assured” a drinking water calamity by depriving Jackson of badly needed funds to upgrade its infrastructure. The organization asked the EPA to investigate the state’s alleged pattern of steering money to majority-white communities with less need.
NAACP national president Derrick Johnson, who lives in Jackson with his family, said Monday that the state needs to direct federal money toward “clean, safe drinking water for every citizen of this city.” He also said the system needs to remain in city control and not be turned over to private contractors or a regional governing board.
“When you consider how water systems are funded in this state, it's from federal funds,” Johnson said. “And in 25 years of the state of Mississippi receiving federal funds for water, the city of Jackson only received funds three of those 25 years. That's an inequity that this administration said they were going to address.”
The AP reported in September that years before Reeves became governor, he touted his own track record of fiscal conservatism by citing his opposition to spending state money for Jackson’s crumbling water and sewer infrastructure. The EPA is not investigating Reeves.
___
Follow Emily Wagster Pettus on Twitter at http://twitter.com/EWagsterPettus.
Load-Date: October 25, 2022



End of Document


Water investigations said to test Biden racial equity pledge
Associated Press International
October 25, 2022 Tuesday 7:51 PM GMT

Copyright 2022 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS; POLITICAL NEWS; STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 767 words
Byline: EMILY WAGSTER PETTUS, Associated Press
Dateline: JACKSON, Miss. 
Body




JACKSON, Miss. (AP) — Federal investigations into public spending on the failing water system in Mississippi's majority-Black capital city are a test of President Joe Biden's commitment to racial equity, one of his congressional allies told hundreds of people at a town hall meeting hosted by the NAACP.
“President Biden has made a fundamental policy in his administration to talk about equity. And this is an issue of equity and fair treatment about the citizens of Jackson," Democratic Rep. Bennie Thompson said Monday night at Jackson's New Hope Baptist Church — the same spacious sanctuary where Biden spoke during the 2020 campaign.
The Environmental Protection Agency announced Thursday that it is investigating whether Mississippi state agencies have discriminated against Jackson by refusing to fund water system improvements in the city of 150,000, where more than 80% of residents are Black and about a quarter of the population lives in poverty.
Thompson said the EPA civil investigation is expected to take about four months. The federal agency could withhold money from the state if it finds wrongdoing — potentially millions of dollars. If the state agencies don’t cooperate with the investigation, the EPA could refer the case to the Department of Justice.
Thompson's congressional district includes most of Jackson. He is chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee — one of two congressional committees that also are investigating how Republican-led Mississippi is spending federal money for water system improvements, and whether some of the money will go to Jackson.
Biden spoke at Jackson's New Hope Baptist Church during a worship service in March 2020 as he was seeking the Democratic nomination for president. Biden was fresh off a win in South Carolina's Democratic primary, where Black voters gave him a crucial boost — and Thompson introduced the former vice president at New Hope as the “Comeback Kid.”
“If I’m the Comeback Kid, there’s only one reason I’ve come back — the African-American community all around the country," Biden told the mostly Black congregation in Mississippi. He also pledged to look out for people who had been marginalized, isolated and oppressed.
Speaking of Biden on Monday, Thompson said: “I’m going to continue to make him a man of his word. He sat right here on the front pew and asked people to support him, and a lot of us did. And so now, it’s a matter of making sure that promises made are promises kept.”
Jackson has struggled with water system problems for years, and most of the city lost running water for several days in late August and early September after torrential rainfall exacerbated problems at the main water treatment facility. Republican Mississippi Gov. Tate Reeves declared an emergency Aug. 29, and the state health department and the Mississippi Emergency Management Agency have been overseeing operations and repairs at the facility since then.
By the time Reeves issued the emergency order, Jackson residents had already been told for a month to boil their water to kill possible contaminants. Volunteers and the National Guard had distributed millions of bottles of drinking water. Although the boil-water notice was lifted in mid-September, many residents remain skeptical about water safety.
In a federal complaint Sept. 27, the NAACP said Mississippi officials “all but assured” a drinking water calamity by depriving Jackson of badly needed funds to upgrade its infrastructure. The organization asked the EPA to investigate the state’s alleged pattern of steering money to majority-white communities with less need.
NAACP national president Derrick Johnson, who lives in Jackson with his family, said Monday that the state needs to direct federal money toward “clean, safe drinking water for every citizen of this city.” He also said the system needs to remain in city control and not be turned over to private contractors or a regional governing board.
“When you consider how water systems are funded in this state, it's from federal funds,” Johnson said. “And in 25 years of the state of Mississippi receiving federal funds for water, the city of Jackson only received funds three of those 25 years. That's an inequity that this administration said they were going to address.”
The AP reported in September that years before Reeves became governor, he touted his own track record of fiscal conservatism by citing his opposition to spending state money for Jackson’s crumbling water and sewer infrastructure. The EPA is not investigating Reeves.
___
Follow Emily Wagster Pettus on Twitter at http://twitter.com/EWagsterPettus.
Load-Date: October 25, 2022



End of Document


Water investigations said to test Biden racial equity pledge
The Associated Press
October 25, 2022 Tuesday 7:51 PM GMT

Copyright 2022 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS; POLITICAL NEWS; STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 766 words
Byline: EMILY WAGSTER PETTUS, Associated Press
Dateline: JACKSON, Miss. 
Body




JACKSON, Miss. — Federal investigations into public spending on the failing water system in Mississippi's majority-Black capital city are a test of President Joe Biden's commitment to racial equity, one of his congressional allies told hundreds of people at a town hall meeting hosted by the NAACP.
“President Biden has made a fundamental policy in his administration to talk about equity. And this is an issue of equity and fair treatment about the citizens of Jackson," Democratic Rep. Bennie Thompson said Monday night at Jackson's New Hope Baptist Church — the same spacious sanctuary where Biden spoke during the 2020 campaign.
The Environmental Protection Agency announced Thursday that it is investigating whether Mississippi state agencies have discriminated against Jackson by refusing to fund water system improvements in the city of 150,000, where more than 80% of residents are Black and about a quarter of the population lives in poverty.
Thompson said the EPA civil investigation is expected to take about four months. The federal agency could withhold money from the state if it finds wrongdoing — potentially millions of dollars. If the state agencies don’t cooperate with the investigation, the EPA could refer the case to the Department of Justice.
Thompson's congressional district includes most of Jackson. He is chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee — one of two congressional committees that also are investigating how Republican-led Mississippi is spending federal money for water system improvements, and whether some of the money will go to Jackson.
Biden spoke at Jackson's New Hope Baptist Church during a worship service in March 2020 as he was seeking the Democratic nomination for president. Biden was fresh off a win in South Carolina's Democratic primary, where Black voters gave him a crucial boost — and Thompson introduced the former vice president at New Hope as the “Comeback Kid.”
“If I’m the Comeback Kid, there’s only one reason I’ve come back — the African-American community all around the country," Biden told the mostly Black congregation in Mississippi. He also pledged to look out for people who had been marginalized, isolated and oppressed.
Speaking of Biden on Monday, Thompson said: “I’m going to continue to make him a man of his word. He sat right here on the front pew and asked people to support him, and a lot of us did. And so now, it’s a matter of making sure that promises made are promises kept.”
Jackson has struggled with water system problems for years, and most of the city lost running water for several days in late August and early September after torrential rainfall exacerbated problems at the main water treatment facility. Republican Mississippi Gov. Tate Reeves declared an emergency Aug. 29, and the state health department and the Mississippi Emergency Management Agency have been overseeing operations and repairs at the facility since then.
By the time Reeves issued the emergency order, Jackson residents had already been told for a month to boil their water to kill possible contaminants. Volunteers and the National Guard had distributed millions of bottles of drinking water. Although the boil-water notice was lifted in mid-September, many residents remain skeptical about water safety.
In a federal complaint Sept. 27, the NAACP said Mississippi officials “all but assured” a drinking water calamity by depriving Jackson of badly needed funds to upgrade its infrastructure. The organization asked the EPA to investigate the state’s alleged pattern of steering money to majority-white communities with less need.
NAACP national president Derrick Johnson, who lives in Jackson with his family, said Monday that the state needs to direct federal money toward “clean, safe drinking water for every citizen of this city.” He also said the system needs to remain in city control and not be turned over to private contractors or a regional governing board.
“When you consider how water systems are funded in this state, it's from federal funds,” Johnson said. “And in 25 years of the state of Mississippi receiving federal funds for water, the city of Jackson only received funds three of those 25 years. That's an inequity that this administration said they were going to address.”
The AP reported in September that years before Reeves became governor, he touted his own track record of fiscal conservatism by citing his opposition to spending state money for Jackson’s crumbling water and sewer infrastructure. The EPA is not investigating Reeves.
___
Follow Emily Wagster Pettus on Twitter at http://twitter.com/EWagsterPettus.
Load-Date: October 25, 2022



End of Document


CITY APPLIES MAYOR'S WATER BILL DISCOUNT STARTING THIS WEEK
States News Service
October 25, 2022 Tuesday

Copyright 2022 States News Service
Length: 376 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: BALTIMORE, Md. 
Body




The following information was released by the office of the Mayor of Baltimore:
Today, Mayor Brandon M. Scott announced that starting this week, City residents will begin to see a 25 percent discount reflected on their water bills.
Mayor Scott first announced the discount following the City's boil water advisory in early September to compensate residents for being without water and to help cover increased usage costs during the flushing process.
"We know the boil water advisory placed an undue burden on our residents. I first made this commitment because I firmly believe it is our role as City leaders to leverage our authority to help residents in their time of need and today we are fulfilling that promise," said Mayor Brandon M. Scott. "I want to thank the Department of Public Works for implementing this directive in a timely fashion and for understanding the importance of supporting our communities."
Residential customers will begin to see the 25 percent water bill discount applied to account charges immediately following the boil water advisory event. The discount will cover charges for the entire September monthly bill, except for the five-dollar Bay Restoration fee passed onto the state of Maryland and reflected under the line item "adjustments/fees" on residential bills. To compare the discounted amount, reference your September monthly bill which can also be accessed online at https://waterbillportal.baltimorecity.gov.
"Since Mayor Brandon Scott announced the 25 percent discount Baltimore Department of Public Works (DPW) staff have worked diligently to implement the discount for residential customers through DPW's billing system," said Department of Public Works Director Jason W. Mitchell, Ed.D. "We thank the Baltimore community for their assistance in flushing the water system immediately following the lift of the boil water advisory and for their patience in applying the 25 percent water bill discount to nearly 200,000 eligible accounts."
Discounts will be applied exclusively to all Baltimore City accounts. All discounts should be reflected by the end of November. If customers do not see the discount on their billing statements, they should contact DPW at (410) 396-5398 or via email at dpw.billing@baltimorecity.gov
Load-Date: October 25, 2022



End of Document


Federal government moving closer to funding Ring of Fire mining roads: document
Newstex Blogs 
The Narwhal
October 25, 2022 Tuesday 12:25 PM EST

Copyright 2022 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 1974 words
Byline: Emma McIntosh
Body




Oct 25, 2022( The Narwhal: https://thenarwhal.ca Delivered by Newstex)  
 By Emma McIntosh[1]  
The federal government has quietly marked the Ring of Fire region of northern Ontario as a potential'priority' mineral deposit, signalling it may be willing to provide funding for efforts to mine there. 
The move, mentioned in a May 2022 internal briefing document obtained by The Narwhal through an access to information request, is a significant step for Ottawa. Since 2019, the Doug Ford government has been pushing the federal government to help fund to its effort to build roads[2] needed for mining —the Ring of Fire is currently only accessible by air or ice road in the winter. 
But discussions between the two governments had largely stalled since then, The Narwhal reported[2] earlier this year, with Ottawa appearing conflicted. While the federal government previously told the province it's interested in developing the region, it also said it would only contribute money for road construction if all affected First Nations sign on. Some have, but others haven't[3]. 

 We're breaking news in Ontario The Narwhal's Ontario bureau is telling environment stories you won't find anywhere else. Keep up with the scoops by signing up for a weekly dose of our independent journalism. We're breaking news in Ontario The Narwhal's Ontario bureau is telling environment stories you won't find anywhere else. Keep up with the latest scoops by signing up for a weekly dose of our independent journalism.  
The document obtained by The Narwhal shows Natural Resources Canada is now mulling whether it may give the Ring of Fire access roads some or all of a $1.5 billion sum, which was set aside in the federal government's 2022 budget to develop infrastructure needed to secure supplies of key minerals. The budget itself said that money would go to 'priority deposits,' but didn't specify which ones. 
The briefing note obtained by The Narwhal shows only one site as a potential candidate for the money: the Ring of Fire. 
A highlighted excerpt of a May 2022 briefing note to Natural Resources Minister Jonathan Wilkinson. The note was obtained by The Narwhal through an access to information request. 
In a statement to The Narwhal, Natural Resources Canada spokesperson Anthony Ertl said the Ring of Fire 'could be considered' for the $1.5 billion. Although the Ring of Fire is the only area mentioned in the document, he said his department is also looking at eight other locations outlined in a federal discussion paper[4] published earlier this year, and hasn't made a final decision. 
'Significant engagement with First Nations and Government of Ontario must take place before any decisions are made,' Ertl said. 
It's not clear what next steps might be or how lack of consent from any affected Indigenous communities might factor in. But a new avenue for federal funding is the most optimistic sign in years for companies seeking to mine[5] the Ring of Fire, and Ford's Progressive Conservatives, who made the plan to build roads there a centrepiece of their 2022 re-election campaign. 
More recently, Deputy Prime Minister Chrystia Freeland also said — during a Washington, D.C. speech[6] earlier this month — that Canada must 'fast-track' the 'energy and mining projects our allies need to heat their homes and to manufacture electric vehicles.' Freeland described this as a 'green transition' to preserve the planet and protect democracies from the 'curse of oil' that currently makes these countries dependent on 'petro-tyrants.'  
Dylan Moore, a spokesperson for Ontario Minister of Mines George Pirie, told The Narwhal in an email that his office can't speculate about the federal government's intentions but believes the Ring of Fire is a 'generational critical minerals opportunity.' 
Neskantaga First Nation Chief Wayne Moonias, whose community is located near the Ring of Fire, said he didn't know it was a candidate for the $1.5 billion. He's concerned that the federal government is moving towards a decision behind closed doors, without involving his nation. Whatever happens could affect the homelands that sustain them —like the Attawapiskat River, where they fish for sturgeon. 
'It's very disturbing to hear that there's going to be investments in our region while we have a 27-year-old boil-water advisory and while we have a housing crisis, while we have a suicide declaration since 2013, yet they're still talking about encroaching and accessing our traditional homelands,' Moonias said. 'Our people have not given their consent on these proposed developments.' 
Neskantaga First Nation is near the Ring of Fire. The nation has long pushed back on how the provincial and federal governments have approached development in the James Bay Lowlands. Photos: Sara Hylton / The Narwhal 
The push to mine the Ring of Fire ties into Canada's search for 'critical minerals' 
The Ring of Fire is extremely remote, located about 540 kilometres northeast of Thunder Bay, Ont. in the James Bay Lowlands. Its mineral deposits include nickel, a key component of many electric vehicles that mining companies around the world are rushing to secure[5] amid demand for lower-emissions technologies. The region also has copper and cobalt, which, along with nickel, are on the federal government's list of 'critical minerals[4]' required either for Canada's economic security, or for the transition to a low-carbon economy. 
Although successive provincial and federal governments have pushed to kickstart mining in the Ring of Fire for over a decade, those efforts haven't come to fruition[3] — and one key reason is the lack of permanent roads and other infrastructure. 
The peatlands of the James Bay Lowlands are boggy, and constructing anything there is tricky and expensive. In a pitch the province sent to the federal government in July 2019, the estimated cost of road construction there was an average of $2.69 million per kilometre, for a total of between $1.1 billion and $1.6 billion. In June, The Narwhal reported[2] in June the cost has since crept up to $2 billion. 
Ontario has, with increasing impatience, asked the federal government to cover half of the cost of road construction: 'It is time for us to put pen to paper and develop the contours of a strong cost-sharing agreement immediately,' former mining minister Greg Rickford wrote in a letter[2] to Wilkinson last winter. 
Though Wilkinson sent Pirie a letter in August to congratulate him on becoming minister of mines, 'no formal discussions have taken place regarding funding for roads to the Ring of Fire,' Ertl told The Narwhal. 
Moore said the two ministers have met twice this year —once at a conference in July, and again in August.  
'Minister Pirie met with Minister Wilkinson and was encouraged by the shared sense of urgency the federal government has for securing more supply of sustainable critical minerals in Ontario and Canada,' Moore said. 
The peatlands in Ontario's Far North store about 35 billion tonnes of carbon. First Nations in the area have differing opinions as to whether mining there is a good idea. Photo: Casa di Media 
Development in the Ring of Fire could have huge impacts on First Nations, greenhouse gasses and vulnerable species 
The James Bay Lowlands are an ecologically sensitive area. The peatlands there sequester an enormous amount of carbon, and disturbing them would release it into the atmosphere and harm efforts to lower emissions. It's also an important wildlife habitat for iconic species like caribou[7]. Environmentalists and some First Nations have big concerns about the potential impact of roads and the mining they could enable. 
'The fact that our community really wants to have the final say on what happens doesn't fall in line with what the government is trying to do,' Moonias said. 
'Especially in a day and age where reconciliation seems to be a buzzword for Canada, and Ontario, it's not really materializing in our community.' 
Roads aren't just about mining: they could also have a profound impact on First Nations living in the James Bay Lowlands. Many are coping with multiple crises at once due to the ongoing impacts of colonization —such as long-term boil-water advisories, youth suicides, high food prices and poverty. 
For Moonias, road access could wreck life as his community knows it: 'This is not just taking a mineral or a deposit out of the area, it's about impacting the way of life, what we've done for countless generations.' 
For others, roads are a way to connect their communities to the south, bringing better services and economic opportunities. 
'These are systemic issues that we're talking about,' Marten Falls Chief Bruce Achneepineskum previously told The Narwhal[5]. 'Why can't youth be supported in these kinds of essential things that our forefathers had envisioned when they signed the treaty?' 
The Ontario government is currently pursuing plans for three roads leading to the Ring of Fire. The proposals are being led by Webequie and Marten Falls First Nations. Map: Shawn Parkinson / The Narwhal 
Right now, the Ford government is pushing to advance three road proposals in the region. The Marten Falls Community Access Road is led by Marten Falls First Nation, and Webequie First Nation is leading work on the Webequie Supply Road. The two nations are jointly planning the third, called the Northern Road Link. (Achneepineskum and Webequie First Nation Chief Cornelius Wabasse didn't respond to interview requests from The Narwhal.) 
'The communities are showing tremendous leadership by working on environmental assessments for their community road projects,' Moore said. 'The Ministry of Mines will continue to support Webequie First Nation and Marten Falls First Nation by assisting with the consultation process for all three road projects.' 
It's not clear when, if ever, these roads might be built. Securing federal funding would be an enormous step forward. But the projects still have to pass environmental assessment processes, which take years[3]. In the meantime, Attawapiskat, Fort Albany and Neskantaga First Nations issued a moratorium[8] on development in the region in 2021, saying they didn't want anything to go ahead without proper environmental scrutiny and until First Nations get more than 'token involvement' in a separate federal review in the Ring of Fire, called a regional assessment. 
'We have a profound and sacred duty to ensure that this part of the Earth is not so wounded from Ring of Fire development that it can longer support our relations and ways of life, or help protect the world from catastrophic climate change,' the moratorium read. 'The James Bay lowlands stand as one of the last and most important bastions of defence against climate collapse.' 
Moonias told The Narwhal he thinks the only feasible way forward is for both levels of government to completely start over on the Ring of Fire —halt all environmental assessments, and try again with the principles of free, prior and informed consent[9] in mind. If they keep pushing forward, he said, his nation will consider all options, legal and otherwise, to protect their homelands. 
'Neskantaga will continue to defend its rights,' he said. 
 [ 1]: https://thenarwhal.ca/author/emma-mcintosh/ [ 2]: https://thenarwhal.ca/ring-of-fire-ontario-election/ [ 3]: https://thenarwhal.ca/ontario-ring-of-fire-explainer/ [ 4]: https://www.canada.ca/en/campaign/critical-minerals-in-canada/canada-critical-minerals-strategy-discussion-paper.html [ 5]: https://thenarwhal.ca/ring-of-fire-noront-bhp-wyloo/ [ 6]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vdW-Rm_Eq4E [ 7]: https://thenarwhal.ca/topics/endangered-caribou-canada/ [ 8]: https://www.newswire.ca/news-releases/first-nations-declare-moratorium-on-ring-of-fire-development-854352559.html [ 9]: https://thenarwhal.ca/tag/free-prior-informed-consent/ 
Link to the original story.
Notes



The views expressed in any and all content distributed by Newstex and its re-distributors (collectively, the "Newstex Authoritative Content") are solely those of the respective author(s) and not necessarily the views of Newstex or its re-distributors. Stories from such authors are provided "AS IS," with no warranties, and confer no rights. The material and information provided in Newstex Authoritative Content are for general information only and should not, in any respect, be relied on as professional advice. Newstex Authoritative Content is not "read and approved" before it is posted. Accordingly, neither Newstex nor its re-distributors make any claims, promises or guarantees about the accuracy, completeness, or adequacy of the information contained therein or linked to from such content, nor do they take responsibility for any aspect of such content. The Newstex Authoritative Content shall be construed as author-based content and commentary. Accordingly, no warranties or other guarantees are offered as to the quality of the opinions, commentary or anything else appearing in such Newstex Authoritative Content. Newstex and its re-distributors expressly reserve the right to delete stories at its and their sole discretion.
Load-Date: October 25, 2022



End of Document


FAITH COMMUNITIES IN JACKSON, MISS., URGE POLITICIANS TO ADDRESS WATER CRISIS
States News Service
October 26, 2022 Wednesday

Copyright 2022 States News Service
Length: 1203 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: CLEVELAND,Ohio 
Body




The following information was released by the United Church of Christ (UCC):
by Maic D'Agostino | published on Oct 26, 2022
When the Rev. Shelli Poe lived in the heart of Jackson, Miss., she regularly received warnings to boil her water.
"I used to live in Fondren, (a neighborhood) in the middle of Jackson, and we would be under boil water notices every other week," she said.
A citywide boil alert, which lasted more than two months this summer after August flooding took out the water treatment plant, was finally lifted Sept. 15. But certain neighborhoods and their water systems continue to see new warnings. In truth, Poe said, the water crisis points to a much longer, deeper problem.
"I think for people who don't know Jackson, the really important thing to know is that this water crisis is not just something that happened because it rained a lot, it flooded and, all of a sudden, the water treatment plant failed," she said. "This has been going on for 50 years."
Poe serves as the pastor of Safe Harbor Family Church, a United Church of Christ congregation in Clinton, Miss., a suburb of Jackson. She's joining fellow local faith leaders in calling for immediate action to address the crisis.
Representatives from more than a dozen religious communities released a statement Oct. 18. The signees implored local, state and federal governments to "come together in the face of a common cause and resolve this matter once and for all."
'Crumbling' infrastructure
To solve the crisis, Poe believes the city will have to dig deep in some ways literally. That's what she discovered while living in Jackson.
"I came to learn the infrastructure in Jackson is just crumbling and has been for the last 50 years," she said.
Members of RIM Church in Atlanta prepare to pass out water and other supplies to Jackson, Miss., residents. RIM Church, like Safe Harbor Family Church in Clinton, Miss., received a $3,000
She noted that the city of Jackson is predominantly Black more than 80 percent of the population. It experienced "white flight" to the suburbs during the 1970s, after schools began to desegregate. That led to a significant loss of revenue, and less funding for aging systems.
"People just skipped town and took all their tax-base money with them," Poe said, noting that loss of tax revenue and the resulting neglect has led to Jackson's infrastructure failure.
"There's lead in the water," she said. "When I was living there and working in the middle of Jackson, if I drank the water, my stomach would feel upset. And that's when we weren't under a boil water notice."
But, of course, people still have to drink something. Poe and her family ultimately decided to move out "because we'd have to drink bottled water all the time."
And it's not just water problems. Poe said electric bills were sky high. The city also had issues with garbage collection while embroiled in a federal lawsuit with its waste management company.
"That's the thing about this whole situation. People are like, 'Oh, it's a water crisis.' Yeah, it's a water crisis; but it's more than that," Poe said.
Disaster Ministries grant to help
To aid its neighbors, Safe Harbor Family Church received a $3,000 Solidarity Grant from UCC Disaster Ministries.
The church plans to turn the grant into $100 gift cards for 300 individuals to offset some of their costs from the water crisis.
"Even things, like, they need to buy a water filter," Poe said. "A hundred bucks is not much, but it may be enough to buy a filtration system to put on your faucet or buy a Brita water filter. ... At least to have a faucet that you can use and give that water to your children."
She added that the congregation is partnering with local organizations to focus on Jackson's "particularly vulnerable" immigrant community. Some may not know where to find services and resources, Poe noted, or may be hesitant to go through official government channels.
"We wanted to do something," she said. "We're a small congregation, so we don't have discretionary funds available. But we were very glad to apply for a solidarity grant from Disaster Ministries."
Atlanta church aids Jackson, too
Another $3,000 Disaster Ministries grant to help Jackson residents was awarded to RIM (Real Inspiration Ministries) Church in Atlanta. With it, the congregation purchased bottled water, water filters and cleaning supplies for many families in Jackson.
"We've made four trips to Jackson thus far, carrying 250 water filters, 400 shower purification systems, cleaning supplies for many, personal hygiene supplies and clean water for cooking, cleaning, drinking and bathing," said the Rev. Sonya Williams, pastor of RIM Church. "We've connected with Club City Lights, a popular nightclub in downtown Jackson, and used their property as Ground Zero.
"We also connected with the Metrocenter Mall, which allowed us to use their dock to have items shipped. And, finally, we connected with Mississippi in Action, led by activist/advocate Valencia Robinson, who allowed us to use her office space to create care packages that would be distributed in apartment complexes on the southside of Jackson, which was the hardest-hit area."
Williams added that her church also attended two marches and rallies with the Poor People's Campaign in downtown Jackson, because we know that is water crisis is about more than water.
Raising awareness
Poe hopes people across the country take notice. Local campaigns to raise awareness like demonstrations by the Poor People's Campaign; advocacy efforts at Tougaloo College, a UCC-affiliated, historically Black college; and the faith leaders' recent statement should help.
"It would be good to raise people's awareness and keep people asking for the things Jackson needs and keep making it priority," Poe said. "Because, honestly, people aren't talking about the water crisis. Because it's over; it's over until the next pipe breaks. Everyone knows the water isn't clean. They just lifted the boil water notice to get people off their backs."
As the statement by Poe and her fellow faith leaders noted, the water crisis "leads to frustration, anger and depression, as chronic problems go unaddressed and citizens feel undervalued."
"I'm glad to see the local faith communities coming together to speak out and apply encouraging pressure to get the ball rolling on a long-term solution," said another signatory, Southeast Conference Minister, the Rev. Kim Wood.
'It's a disgrace'
Some signs of progress already are appearing. Just days after the statement was released, the Environmental Protection Agency launched a civil rights investigation into Jackson's water crisis.
Thanks to a complaint filed by the NAACP, the EPA's new environmental justice office will determine whether the crisis is a result of racial discrimination.
Poe said it will take sustained pressure to effect real change to address Jackson's failing systems. It's not just fixing the water.
"The whole city is like that. It's a disgrace," she said. "And it's because 80 percent of the city is Black, and state leaders have said, 'That's all right; they can live that way.' Basically, 'We don't care.' Reluctance to take federal money and all that adds up to a bad situation. And the water crisis is a little blip."
Load-Date: October 26, 2022



End of Document


GOVERNOR RON DESANTIS ISSUES UPDATES ON HURRICANE IAN RECOVERY ON OCTOBER 26, 2022
States News Service
October 26, 2022 Wednesday

Copyright 2022 States News Service
Length: 3408 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: TALLAHASSEE, FL 
Body




The following information was released by the office of the Governor of Florida:
Today, Governor Ron DeSantis was in Fort Myers Beach to announce efforts to identify and remove vessels and other debris from waterways and to expedite the removal of debris on private and commercial properties. Governor DeSantis also announced the approval of the FEMA Direct Temporary Housing Program for the counties hit hardest by Hurricane Ian, and a state-led housing program for Floridians that may not be eligible for the FEMA program. To watch the Governor's full remarks, click here.
The Florida Disaster Fund has raised more than $50 million since activation to provide financial assistance to our communities as they respond to and recover from times of emergency or disaster. To read more, click here. To contribute, visit www.FloridaDisasterFund.org or text DISASTER to 20222.
First Lady Casey DeSantis has worked to expand mental health in response to Hurricane Ian. State Disaster Recovery Mental Health Coordinator, Sara Newhouse, compiled a comprehensive webpage of resources to help navigate available resources for mental health needs post hurricane. To visit the site, click here.
To guide Floridians looking for their next-steps, FloridaStormRelief.com serves as a one-stop-shop to navigate all available assistance. Here you can find a check list for recovery following Hurricane Ian, resources for businesses, and ways to help Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian.
State response efforts include:
Florida Division of Emergency Management (FDEM)
At the direction of Governor DeSantis, FDEM has developed a state-led housing mission to supplement FEMA direct temporary housing efforts. FDEM is working to provide travel trailers and other temporary housing solutions to survivors with significant housing needs who are not yet eligible for FEMA's direct housing program. Individuals who have already applied for FEMA Individual Assistance do not need to reapply for the Direct Temporary Housing program but should update their applications to reflect current housing needs.
The State of Florida and FEMA have implemented waivers for certain requirements of debris removal on private and commercial properties, including damaged slabs on private property.
FDEM is utilizing satellite imagery and artificial intelligence to expedite damage assessments.
FDEM has opened a call center and website for Floridians to apply for debris removal assistance, including displaced vehicles, vessels or other titled property. Homeowners, business owners, and titled property owners can visit IanDebrisCleanup.com or call (850) 961-2002 for more information.
FDEM is collecting information to assist disaster survivors who have critical unmet needs due to Hurricane Ian. Disaster survivors can fill out the voluntary Unmet Needs Resident Survey in English or Spanish.
At the request of Governor DeSantis, FDEM worked with federal partners to secure an additional 30 days of 100% federal cost share for Public Assistance Category A (debris removal) and Category B (emergency protective measures) for Hurricane Ian recovery efforts. More information can be found here.
Impacted residents can apply at DisasterAssistance.gov or visit an open Disaster Recovery Center (DRC). Individuals are encouraged to continuously update their applications as their situations change so that FEMA may consider their eligibility for additional assistance.
FDEM worked with the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) to make long-term, low-interest disaster loans available to cover losses not fully compensated by insurance and other sources. Individuals can apply online using the Electronic Loan Application on the SBA's secure website at DisasterLoanAssistance.SBA.gov. Information and applications can also be obtained by calling 800-659-2955 or by visiting a Business Recovery Center.
More than 11,500 Blue Roofs have been installed by the US Army Corps of Engineers. For more information, visit blueroof.us or call 1-888-ROOF-BLU.
FDEM is mobilizing generators and water pumps for Sanibel Island as infrastructure inspections are completed and facilities can begin operation. In coordination with USACE, 14 inspection teams have completed more than 2,600 building inspections in Fort Myers.
One barge and one landing craft continue to provide critical resources to the impacted areas of North Captiva Island.
FDEM is working with St. Augustine maintenance crews to begin restoration of impacted dunes to be completed before turtle nesting season.
Nearly 500 STARLINK Units have been distributed to businesses and responders in impacted communities to provide Internet connection.
FDEM has authorized 303 Debris Management Sites to reduce and remove debris from impacted areas.
Internet Connectivity
For Comcast Xfinity customers in impacted areas that are still experiencing service interruption, it is highly likely that the equipment or the connection inside the home may be damaged. Please chat with a Xfinity assistant online or call 1-800-XFINITY (1-800-934-6489).
Xfinity WiFi vans, which provide free wireless internet service so residents and emergency personnel can stay connected are open and active for impacted individuals, free for everyone, to connect from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily until further notice, currently stationed at:
Walmart Supercenter at 1619 Del Prado Boulevard South, Cape Coral, FL 33990
Walmart Supercenter at 17105 San Carlos Boulevard, Fort Myers, FL 33931
Walmart Neighborhood Market (Charlotte Square) at 2150 Tamiami Trail, Port Charlotte, FL 33948
Punta Gorda Isles Civic Association at 2001 Shreve Street, Punta Gorda, FL 33950
ATandT is welcoming other carriers' customers to roam on its networks so they can connect, even if their carrier's service isn't available after the storm. Since opening the ATandT network last week for roaming, it has handled about 47 TBs (equal to 16 billion text messages) of traffic from other carriers to help keep those in impacted areas connected.
Comcast has Xfinity WiFi vans to provide free internet connectivity as communities continue to recover from Hurricane Ian. The vans are available from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily, located at:
Walmart Supercenter, 1619 Del Prado Boulevard South, Cape Coral, FL
Bonita Springs Public Library, 2687 Pine Ave., Bonita Springs, FL
Walmart Supercenter, 17105 San Carlos Blvd., Fort Myers, FL
Walmart Neighborhood Market (Charlotte Square) at 2150 Tamiami Trail, Port Charlotte, FL
Verizon customers and small business customers in Charlotte, Collier, Desoto, Hardee, Lee, and Sarasota counties will continue to receive unlimited calling, texting, and mobile data through October 31, 2022, in counties.
Verizon has deployed a Wireless Emergency Connection Center (WECC) to assist Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian with wi-fi, phone batteries, and charging stations. This station is available to any customer of any carrier stay connected.
Fort Myers Town Hall, 2525 Estero Boulevard, Fort Myers Beach, FL 33931
Additionally, charging pedestals are available at:
North Collier Regional Park, 15000 Livingston Road, Naples, FL 34116
Lumen customers with either CenturyLink or Quantum Fiber services experiencing outages can visit https://www.centurylink.com/home/help.html or call 1-800-201-4099 to report outages.
To report a trouble ticket for the Quantum Fiber service, customers can chat by visiting https://www.quantumfiber.com/support.html or calling 1-833-250-6306.
Lumen has set up three 24/7 Wi-Fi locations for its CenturyLink and Quantum Fiber customers. The free Wi-Fi locations include:
4001 Palm Tree Boulevard, Cape Coral, FL 33904
10546 Tipton Drive, Bokeelia, FL 33922
4195 Kings Highway, Port Charlotte, FL 33980
Health and Human Services
DOH and DCF partnered with BetterHelp to offer three months of free mental health services via online therapy to those impacted by Hurricane Ian. To access these free services, visit betterhelp.com/voucher and enter code: HurricaneIan. Visitors to BetterHelp's site will be prompted to answer a questionnaire that will match those impacted residents with a licensed mental health professional.
Boil Water Notices have been issued for 15 areas, over 4 counties.
DOH has waived costs for any vital statistics, such as birth and death certificates.
Infrastructure
Initial debris pick-up:
4,770 miles of state roads have been completed statewide.
Statewide 124,713 cubic yards of vegetation debris have been picked up.
Roads that remain closed due to Hurricane Ian:
DeSoto County
NW 2nd Bunker Avenue at Arrowhead Pond Road Lane closed, both directions
Hardee County
SR-64 from Brantwood Drive to Wilbur C King Boulevard Lane closed, both directions
Mass Care
DCF launched the Disaster Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (D-SNAP), which is being implemented in phases by county. Phase three will start on October 24 and includes Hillsborough, Lake, Osceola, Putnam, Seminole, and Volusia counties. Pre-registration is required by all applicants.
To expedite service to eligible households, DCF is offering phone interviews through the D-SNAP Call Center. Details can be found online here.
As of October 23, DCF has disbursed $69.7 million to more than 112,000 households.
DOEA and FDOT have partnered to provide transportation to displaced seniors in Southwest Florida. Call 1-800-96-Elder for assistance.
DCF has two Family Resource Support Centers in Deltona and New Smyrna Beach to help individuals and families. More information can be found at MyFLFamilies.com/FRSC.
Law Enforcement
DCF has created a First Responder Support Line (407-823-1657). This line combines current resources into a single point of contact that will connect first responders with mental health professionals.
Peer support is available 24/7 to all FHP members and their families through FHP's Peer Support Team and the FHP Wellness App to support their overall wellness.
FLHSMV has deployed Florida Licensing on Wheels (FLOW) mobile units to Lee, Charlotte, Sarasota, and Collier counties to provide no-fee replacements for driver license and identification credentials, vehicle registrations, and titles.
Dates, locations, and hours of operation for FLOW mobiles are subject to change and will be announced on FLHSMV.gov.
FHP encourages motorists to report disabled vehicles or dangerous driving conditions to *FHP (*347).
FLHSMV driver license and motor vehicle service center closures can be found here.
FLHSMV has issued Emergency Order 102522, which:
Waives specific requirements for commercial motor vehicles providing emergency relief; and
Waives the replacement fees for driver's license and identification credentials, vehicle registrations and titles, vessel registrations and titles and temporary parking permits for impacted individuals.
FWC has established a Hurricane Ian Vessel Hotline 850-488-5600.for vessel and property owners affected by vessels displaced by Hurricane Ian. More than 2,100 vessels have been assessed by displaced vessel teams.
FWC cautions all boaters to exercise extreme caution in waterways in areas affected by Hurricane Ian and encourages boaters to report missing or damaged waterway markers by calling 866-405-2869 or by filling out an online form here.
Private Sector Support
The Florida Housing Finance Corporation is awarding $5 million to local housing partners to help Floridians impacted by Hurricane Ian pay their home insurance deductibles. Funding assistance is available to individuals, and families in Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Hardee, Lee, and Sarasota counties who apply and qualify. Homeowners can contact their local Housing Initiatives Partnership program office directly for more information.
Florida was approved for $30 million for the National Dislocated Worker Grant for Floridians without work due to Hurricane Ian, which DEO applied for through the U.S. Department of Labor on October 4, 2022.
DEO staff and volunteers are providing in-person services and surging resources to five Disaster Recover Center locations located in Lee, Charlotte, Sarasota, and Collier Counties. Locations for DRCs are available here.
Business Recovery Centers, represented by the U.S. Small Business Administration and the Florida Small Business Development Center network.
Uber is offering free round-trip rides, up to $30 each way, to and from 10 state-approved Disaster Recovery Centers (DRC). Details on how to redeem a free round trip to and from a state-approved DRC are available here.
Some requirements for Reemployment Assistance have been temporarily waived in FEMA disaster-declared counties. Eligible Floridians must file state Reemployment Assistance before Disaster Unemployment Assistance (DUA). Learn more here.
Over 17,700 DUA claims have been submitted since DUA was activated and more than 8,500 have been approved.
DEO has deployed personnel and extended call center hours to seven days per week. Additionally, DEO secured six ID.me kiosks and support technicians to reduce the number of fraudulent claims. DEO is expanding the number of agents available to review and process claims.
DEO and CareerSource Florida have activated the disaster recovery jobs portal to connect businesses and individuals impacted by Hurricane Ian with workforce programs.
All career centers are open statewide. To find your local career center, visit Find Your Local Team or Career Center Directory.
The Florida Small Business Emergency Bridge Loan Program has been activated to assist small businesses that have been impacted by Hurricane Ian with short-term, zero-interest loans to meet the businesses' immediate financial needs. Click here to learn more.
An eligibility requirement of this program was waived to allow sole proprietors in the Marine Fisheries Industry with businesses located in Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Hardee, Lee, and Sarasota counties. Learn more here.
DEO is updating www.FloridaDisaster.biz with real-time information for business owners, their families, and employees for Hurricane Ian.
DEO's Rebuild Florida team continues to work with homeowners to assess any damage that may have occurred to Hurricane Irma projects from Hurricane Ian. The team continues to rotate deployed staff to Ian-impacted areas, supporting recovery efforts.
Enterprise Florida activated its Disaster Assistance page with state and federal resources available for businesses to recover.
Airbnb launched a website to help with relocation efforts for impacted residents here. This page features properties that are available outside of the FEMA Disaster zones.
For displaced residents of Lee and Charlotte counties, Airbnb is working with nonprofit partners to offer vouchers for temporary housing. To learn more, click here.
Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
309 Disaster Debris Management Sites have been authorized to operate for Hurricane Ian, including 74 in Lee, Charlotte and Sarasota counties to expedite clean-up, reducing environmental and public health impacts, and meeting federal reimbursement requirements.
DEP staff are on the ground assessing water and wastewater infrastructure, with resources from FlaWARN, US Army Corps of Engineers, local utilities and the Division of Emergency Management's contractor.
DEP issued an Emergency Final Order waiving permitting requirements for the storage and processing of solid waste, including storm debris.
DEP has also issued an Emergency Final Order to expedite necessary repair, replacement and restoration of structures, equipment, surface water management systems, works and other systems damaged by the storm.
Licensing
DBPR issued Emergency Order 2022-05 extends EO 2022-01 to change the renewal deadline to November 22, 2022, for multiple licenses, and extends the deadline for the filing of monthly reports and returns by certain alcoholic beverage and tobacco license holders.
DBPR issued EMERGENCY ORDER 2022-06 waives permit fees associated with replacing, relocating and repairing elevators regulated by DBPR in listed counties through November 22, 2022 and extends expiration of work permits.
DBPR Emergency Order 2022-04 waives the application fees associated with relocating or reopening certain businesses, including the addition of branch locations regulated by the Department or by any board, commission or division of the Department, where relocation or reopening arises from damages caused by Hurricane Ian in the listed counties.
DBPR Emergency Order 2022-03 waives the requirement for certified or registered, general, building, or residential contractors to subcontract roofing work for the repair or installation of any roof type in listed counties.
Temporary Veterinarian License Application: The Florida Board of Veterinary Medicine has a 30-Day Temporary Veterinarian License available to out-of-state veterinarians to provide relief veterinary services in Florida.
Florida licensed veterinarians interested in offering volunteer services should contact Florida Vet Corp for information at 1-800-HELP-FLA (1-800-435-7352).
Insurance
OIR is requiring insurers to report preliminary catastrophe claims for Hurricane Ian. To date, insurers have reported a total of $ 7,334,629,438 in estimated insured losses and a total of 580,107 claims. Additional claim data and information can be found here.
The Department of Revenue issued an Emergency Order, extending certain filing due dates for Florida businesses in counties impacted by Hurricane Ian. The September 2022 and October 2022 reporting periods are extended to November 23, 2022, for sales and use tax, reemployment tax and several other tax types. Those businesses affected by this order or impacted by the storm may contact Taxpayer Services at (850) 488-6800 or by email at GTAHurricaneHelp@Floridarevenue.com with questions.
OIR issued Emergency Order 300997-22-EO regarding the extension of grace periods, limitations on cancellations and nonrenewals, deemers and limitations on "use and file" filings.
OIR instituted a data call to collect catastrophe claims data related to Hurricane Ian. OIR is requiring daily catastrophe claims reporting for Hurricane Ian to assist with determining the impact on Florida's insurance industry. More information is available here.
Elections Update
At the request of the Supervisors of Elections in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties, and at the recommendation of Secretary of State Cord Byrd, the Governor signed Executive Order 22-234, which will help ensure adequate access to Florida's 2022 General Election ballot for the voters of Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties.
The Governor's Executive Order includes provisions authorizing the Supervisors of Elections in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties to:
Extend the number of days for early voting and designate additional early voting locations. The early voting period may begin as early as Monday, October 24, 2022, and can extend through Election Day, November 8, 2022.
Allow voters in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties to request by phone that their vote-by-mail ballot be mailed to an address other than their address of record. Voters must still provide an appropriate form of identification in the same manner as absent uniform service and overseas voters.
Designate and provide notice of the locations for secure ballot intake stations and relocate and consolidate polling locations as necessary.
Increase the pool of eligible poll workers who may serve within Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties by making eligible any poll workers previously trained for the 2020 election cycle and thereafter and by encouraging state employees to serve as poll workers in these counties.
Governor DeSantis also directed all state agencies to render aid and assistance as needed by the Supervisors of Elections in Charlotte, Lee, and Sarasota counties. Secretary Byrd and the Department of State assessed the need for these provisions based on extensive outreach to Florida's Supervisors of Elections.
Secretary Byrd and the Division of Elections leadership conducted continuous outreach and assessed the needs and readiness of counties in or around Hurricane Ian's path, including: Charlotte, Citrus, Collier, DeSoto, Dixie, Flagler, Gilchrist, Hardee, Hernando, Highlands, Hillsborough, Lafayette, Lake, Lee, Levy, Manatee, Orange, Osceola, Pasco, Pinellas, Polk, Putnam, Sarasota, Seminole, St. Johns, Taylor, and Volusia counties. Secretary Byrd also personally visited the hardest hit areas, including Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto, Lee, Hardee, and Sarasota counties to meet with their Supervisors of Elections in-person.
###
Load-Date: October 26, 2022



End of Document

